eaming
7

In Humans and Machines

A Computer Model of
the Stream of Thought

{| ROBERT MANNING ff
4 STROZIER LIBRARY #

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2024

https://archive.org/details/daydreaminginhum0000muel

Daydreaming in
Humans

and Machines

A Computer Model of the Stream of Thought

Erik T. Mueller

(A) ABLEX PUBLISHING CORPORATION
NORWOOD, NEW JERSEY

ROBERT MANNING
STROZIER LIBRARY
JUN 7

1990

Tallahassee, Florida

Cover art © 1989 by Robert E. Mueller.
Cover design by Deb Hoeffner.
Copyright © 1990 by Erik T. Mueller.
All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored
in a retreival system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording, or otherwise, without permission of the publisher.
Printed in the United

States of America.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication

Data

Mueller, Erik T.
Daydreaming in humans and machines.
Bibliography:

p.

Includes index.
1. Fantasy—Computer

3. Artificial intelligence.
BF408.M84
1988
ISBN 0-89391-562-9

simulation.

Ablex Publishing Corporation
355 Chestnut St.
Norwood, NJ 07648

2. Fantasy.

I. Title.
154.3

89-6483

Contents

Introduction
Pie he DAY DREAMER togranr thee
ae ee IPE 2:
1.2 Research Objectives and Issues ........... Aa
A
1.2.1
Learning from Imagined Experiences ............
Lice
Creative FETOMIemOLVIle seen re ce ee ee oe ah
Me See MOUS peter thee Cet togant en merry er eee eee oe
iS -Poundations. oF DAY DREAMER.
— ..c. .s. oe kone. te.
(eo.
eX eLUGeO eeNCNOMCNa,
ost. nee
een Ge ae se he
Lot2 entiOl Gl aydreamin@en.
Coos cores
ee ee
mer
AY Peale TOCOCOLATAIVSIS yeas mcgd a ceils austin eens! oe) ee eee
1eAs Meee IRCEROSDECLIVETRCDOLLS capes, ao
sok et eae eee
es
eee
IMI OMC PLOLOCOISr sn na
ac eon e aks eee ce
1.4.3
Thought Sampling and Event Recording..........
PP eC OMCs SOL GUE MOOK na. ta fica
oreo a cel Pegs eek oe
Architecture of DAYDREAMER
DEO VERVICWEOL TTOOTAML cote cote werace olous) geen aeteiies eas
Deo mA TAV ULC ats AS PAA GC ype ee oscre fis ges, See a ee
Oe
Dow
meErevious Personal Goal pets...
2 un os ae ee
Ge
DED
Oeh Olt ersollal GOals. c ncyic active: Cte te oe ease
2) ob lanning aud inference Rules. as.
sys vgs: vgs yegs
2.3 Daydreaming as Multiple Goal Planning ..............
2.4 Daydreaming as Emotion-Driven Planning.............
Di) MELOCCCUECH HOD LAV OLCALIAING coos ic au Uys om artis swe oe ge io

Emotions and Daydreaming
3.1 Emotional Responses in Daydreaming ......7........
Gi ee IOWOn: NepresentatiON cs 4 oases 2 fue 6 ok fe ee ena, fe «
SMD
aN dECOMMIe (A0GIS oe eee ce hein
acs gsis Se Os
Fe
+
SAP MORON a PECOd DACK OYStCI oh ac
oS cars bs 8 tp ee
se
Biase I RUTH Ya adel UAE CY CNR INSIe aA RMT Cy SNR Ole aie ee a aa
AtIOUAIIZAbION DVeNIIXeC ICSSLNG eck mens. sce usin ee
Sse
iil

CONTENTS

3.5.2
Rationalization by Hidden Blessing >=... 2... = 3.5.3
Rationalization by External Attribution ..........
3.5.4
Rationalization by Mimmization | 7255 .> 2-225.) 3:6. Revenge: as. corie oh. ee ee ese
ce
ee
eee
3.6.1
The Purpose of Revenge Daydreams ............
3.6.2.
Achievement.of Revense 2 = 2...
ee
ee
327 ROVING s Gio Gane
le eee) Sey 8 ee Ee gtaeetnn ee aeemeere ee
3.8 2 Pimotions-as MoOtvatione « o.2,.-c0 5
6 on ee ote ee eee te aes
3:9. “Idiosyncratic: Reeling States.
as, «2 5
ga
ee
ee
3.10 Previous Related’ Work in Emotions
= .<. =... 3 sheets
3:10.1- Simon’s_ Interruption Mechanism ears 9c.)
ae aa <b
3:10.2> Colby’s PARRY*
2353 agit. See
eee
3-10:3° Abelson’s' Affect; Taxonomy. > 4 <a. ees ee ee eS
3.10.4 Weiner’s Causal Attribution Model of Emotions
.....
3.10.5 The Emotion Model of Bower and Cohen .........
3.10:6 Dyers, BORIS Affect-Model cqaraig 47s @ os
ee
3010s /--Pteifer’s PR BIWRR 8 rt
re cane ede te ee
ee oe
3.11 Work Related to: Daydreaming.Goale
rg os cus aoe ch eG Se
3. U1. Defense: Mechanisms. op sie
ek nae sere ot kes cen ea
3.11.2 McDougall’s Emotions and Instincts ............
3.11.3 Festinger’s Reduction of Cognitive Dissonance
......
3.11.4 Abelson’s Simulation of Hot Cognition. ..........
golil5 -Coley's Netrosis Model) <. 07) sx. aecicge aene, ie
3.11.6 Janis and Mann’s Bolstering Strategies
..........
3.11.7 Summary and Comparison of Strategies ..........

65
66
66
67
68
69
70
71
74
76
76
76
77
Ee
(<3
78
78
79
79
79
80
80
81
82
82

Learning through Daydreaming
4.1 Episodic Memory and Analogical Planning
............
4:l1Representation ofl pisodes 1... aon. ae ae ees ae
4:12. -SbOrage. Ol- LepiSOdes) Ga... aacu:ay ttre as a ae
41.3:
Analogical’ Planning 6 i
.c entity
te
oe ee
4.1.4
Issues for Theories of Episodic Memory ..........
4:2 Definition of Learning, 4.5 4) s<-< < 15.0 saa ee ee
4.2.1
Episodes for Improvement of Future Search ........
4.2.2
Episodes for Changing Knowledge Accessibility ......
422.3)
Survival-and Growth
cece 5)co
otc eee
4:3 .Daydreaming Goals for Learning . . .....,. «+s 2 en
eee oe
dal
JRevergal 25. <i 3 ecac neeele 0e a cae Oe
4:3:2Rehearsal and Recovery %_. iis qq
ee eee
49-0
Repercusslonses
a. 6) su x
0 Meee Cee
4.4 Evaluation and Decision Making ......6..540
008.
4.4.1
Daydream Evaluation Metrics................
4.4.2
Daydream Selection...
4... 4 5). eee
4.5 Intention Formation and Application. ...............

85
86
87
88
89
95
96
98
100
101
103
103
107
108
109
109
112
113

CONTENTS

£6

Related. Workin’ Machine-earninges

ef

oldie
oak
. T.

Everyday Creativity in Daydreaming
Daley WetmnitiompoleCrcalivity i: heist.
Ges os 6 ok ou bw
5.2 Aspects of Creativity in Daydreaming ... 2... sce
es
idol s reo Kite vAwaver
erin ecu.) ad See
eae,
<f.
5.2.2)
-Pancitul PossibilityaGenerationgaies
veh 82s acc). .8.
D2.0.
-randing NewnConnections tmkwrea)
sili
te. ets
5.2.4
Mechanisms in DAYDREAMER
..............
doe sSerendipiiva Daydreamingrais
ncn... .. mis teen Beh. dla. 0:
5.3.1,
.Serendipity-Based Learning...
26 svi cuen. 04.0.5. «
5vd:20)
soerenainityeRecognition ».. Vwi.
Shei). os.
d:3-31-4h pisode-Driven Serendipitye.,
suites ious ste. ot.
5.39.4.Object-Driven, serendipity, Saree).
1. T. . .
5.3.5
Input-State-Driven Serendipity ...............
0.4, GACHON ANtANON pi acbutes cn MMOON oe. ceetehs. 2.8, Te
5.4.1;
The-Purpose of Action Mutations,
} s6: 2.108. oi... .
5.4.2.
Strategies for,ActiondMutation!).ugicos inert ala. .f:
5.5 The Phenomena of Incubation and Insight .............
5.6u0Previous: Work in. ProbleniSolving. 21%. ... silo.
To.
5. OMe eorandiolnibonss
.-.. elem
eemiat. stoke.
52022 b VA BO Libis)
ae aos a nee ee ete
RCS
4%
50 Om NO MED Bee i en ah IGE
Ee
or SURE
rai Be,
5.004
ABANDORAUS
> aussie hk, dh wupiddel. kiar. .
biO..,
Opportunistic Planning s.) eer asaed:
LAGS. oo
5.0. .Previous: Workin Gxeativity Role. F. Bee Salita Mhonliceeunal..
«6.
Ohale ELA EOP INES
sine ss Saeed sete 2
2
Dies
HAN and-hURISKO: Garr leytinad.
epontends Asie i. « s
BETol xNCO NO th
rea ms, Ie
MD Re. oblae Ss. 8s

Daydreaming in the Interpersonal Domain
Gilly (Basics Statescand Actions mnt. Apne aed
ae wadiee >) “Meats =
6.1.1
Conceptual Dependency Representation ..........
6.1.2
Conceptual Dependency in DAYDREAMER
.......
feelin: Sate ss
< 2 >. enspehee VIE
6.2, “Other Blannitigan
oer |) cre ar
OP
ee
CaAs|Scheer
ERIN
................
Basic Attitude Representation
6.3.1
Assessing, Forming, and Modifying Attitudes .......
6.3.2
Attitudestand Meeting People —.. ..« 2. 6s ie ee 8%
633.3.
eee
2... 6s ee.
6.4 Interpersonal Relationships ........-etiRE “ours, orn cs 618 BOiaeleus eh. +|.
eLOVCISUE,
Gite
at. alewomers. 4,
seers
= 4s. 4 Sy2 GRO
Sbrienastemeice
G AE
a Sons L.
Employ mentees, i ee
64ish
6.5 Strategies for Fanciful Planning ......-.-.-..+-254-.

vi

CONTENTS

6.5.1.
65.2
65.3

ere
= Sea
-Plausible Plannineds (2.52
ee ee
ce Sue
Subgoal. Relaxsatigiv:
st eee
eS 22 Se
2
InferenceInhibition

oO. 163
164
164

7

Implementation of DAYDREAMER
167
7.1. Summary Statistics >. oo, .ejec Gr OTRO
Sree: cee
167
7.2. The GATE Representatiombanguage!2)s7.gaeeaee. . 169
72:17
sSlot-Filler:Objects: ...07 ePeete ft wee Ree
a ee. 5 169
7:22:
«Unification...
Paria aetes 1s 2. otSee
eee
es 170
7:23,
Instantiation......
w+,tonn een
Set ae Sree. e. 172
T.2A4.
Vatiabilizatioti-es
.seesed See
ee
eee == 172
(25%
(Contexts
a0 & x weos. REL.
She
ee
o L72
7.3: Planning and Inference Ralesqenae.rec
on
auree
Apa
oe 173
(i>
:Planning Rules: <2 Raha ss, ae
as
Po:
s 174
7.32.
_Intetence, Rules
a we eerie
eel. 6 ee
174
1.333.
(Rules for Actions 4¢--todcels «2-3 « a
es
175
1 34.
-Railes. for Concern initiatiom +-<h sae
wee. dee
Ce 177
7A: Basic Procedures, for: Daydreaminens'.".iet-eeeeien.
Cbs +. 178
TA.
-Emotion-Drivens@ontrolwtiecie
Le Gicowhanee
& Sed. te. 17
(A2
Bidhiner. 4 s-th oR
Sees
So
eee
ee 179
7.4.3-Concem Lermunahon a. 5.ee nae Gee
ees ea
181
TA
RulesA pplications wt.
Sons es
es,
182
(A5
PBlaanine RuletApplication
....-...<.>
see
Gee. SS 183
74.6)
Inference RulesApplications
<<< -84245 790.4. = 184
CAT.
Concern Initiation.
geae ae. eee oe kee
186
7.5 Episodic Memory and Analogical Planning
............
186
Gbelo>
BpisG@de COraee mW cee Sco on, ee es ce 187
(5.2:
“Episode-Rethievals
ea. Gea
ee BE
ee. oy 187
T0273.
ARCMINCINE MS WSIS WRV So io coh hinad Meee,
ee ae 188
(0A
Revised Planning Rule Application...
... 49...
~ 6 ee 189
7.5.5
Analogical RuletA pplication:
> 9) 26
Wh sean ee 189
(35.6
‘SubgoalCreation’ 2S visa
Sahl
ee Sere
eee, cae 189
76 Other Planning yargers A eh
Oaks, Ek
ee
190
{61
Forward’ OthersP lange) 2 Pe
re nee, acts: ie 190
76.2°
Backward’ Other Planning? #00 <2
tenn. cee 191
Tf Serendipity i. Pee WOR ere ere a ee
192
tt.
Serendipity Recogintions
hie. eek, oer
ae
192
T2
-Action* Mutations.
4 <2) ee
ee
eee
194

8

Comparison of Episodic Memory Schemes
8.1. -Diserimination ‘Nets ni dueng. Yass he.

195
195

8.2.
8.3.

.Spreading Activation Models Waa ua. «. . open
een
-Cotineetionism:«:..)se
beak ane 5: s:00); on7 eee

8:4.

Intersection:Indexing::"..

198
203
208

4: Qe

ies %

ee

ee

CONTENTS

9

Review of the Literature on Daydreaming
9.1, Previous. Work in Daydreaming svan 0% wit )>. epcieten
9.1.1
Associationist Theories of Thought ........ i eee ete
.deines’s; otreamsof Dhoughtienones eet) s.. 4 jateie whe) <b: le
9:1.2.
Freud’s Theory of Dreaming and Daydreaming . Cie Re)
9.1.3
42 geokiow!, £
9:14- (Blenler’s Autistic DhinkingM.04)
. fat ie Mee ae
Varendonck’s Psychology of Daydreaming ...
9.1.5
Green’s Study of Daydreaming and Development
9.1.6
The Research of Singer and Colleagues... .. . = Tee) ie? Se
9.1.7
siclinger’s: Theory of Fantasy... .s-45.A
9153+
wee, on Nee te
....
Pope’s Studies of the Stream of Thought
9.1.9
9.1.10 Shanon’s Investigation of Thought Sequences . .
Diz) svelaved Wotkiim NightsDreaiming.. 043...
«aa «
9.2.1
Foulkes’s Scoring System for Latent Structure. .
9.2.2
The Computer Analogy for Night Dreaming. . .
9.2.3.
The Dream Simulation of Moser et al. ......
SL aaa TVA OCIC, LTCAMIS 92 ee ne onete eile vate ake done
G2
mea
ACECUNCATING Ser nc aah ee Ra
ct ngSaioe he

10 Underpinnings of a Daydreaming Theory
10.1) Pitlesophical Underpinmings <a.)
ee
eee
10.1.1 Functionalist Approach to Mind-Body Problem .
10.1.2 Problems with Theories of Subjective Phenomena
12a hee roplemOroemantiGs 2s sway.
eee i se se
10.2-1. Structure-Content, Distinctions...
. 4... 2. 2.
10.2.2 Semantics of the Stream of Consciousness ... .
10.2.3 The Functionalist Approach to Semantics ... .
10.2.4 The Elusiveness of Concepts
...........
10.2.5 Connectionist Approaches to Semantics .....
TO DeQClelntlic, WINGeT PINUINGS pix
corns
oo
a
ey A
10.3.1 Scientific Objectives and Methodology ......
10.3.2 Goals and Limits of Artificial Intelligence .... epuet de; ie. -s
10.3.3 Theory Construction, Testing, and Evaluation
.
10.3.4 Pylyshyn’s Strong Equivalence ... . ... 2), .- .
DOS DISCIISSION el eee Sk eso koe oe et a eee,
11 Future Work and Conclusions
11.1 Eventual Applications and Extensions

..........
haere
ig os sen g's
Taree ACoLODOMOUS ECODOUS Be
TEpie2 Operating SV scCUls) 5:5,kee er. = = eee moh aes
Pelee SentiNe. VyRIGUNG ake eee. sera yis forging i a otDe ew: eae:
sw
a
et cis gia fee 6 le
Misa GnVersatiOGl
ee Re
Se
eee
LUGO,
NTI
..........
11.1.6 Psychotherapy and Psychiatry

Vil

CONTENTS

viil

11,1:7

Education ‘andseGamesa=:

2 2snterean =

11.2 Shortcomings.of the Program @::'9..et-1e.)
8 Be
11.3 Overdetermination of Daydreaming.........
11.3.1 An Overdetermination Mechanism .....
11+3:28 Rotential Benefits + wea,
Go. vate
a es
11.3.3 Problems for the Mechanism
........
1123.4. InitiabSolutions:.
4s =eseneowe
|. seh
11.:35u DAYDREAMERFi
ceeeieals.
> cele oie
11.3.6 Relationship to Previous Work ....... a:
114° Was: It: Worth lt.
.. wipes Soo eet fy eae is

Annotated

Traces from DAYDREAMER

AA GOV.ERS Lx perience: opt
on es
oe. as
AC REVIGNGEL Davareat aac. cas cs ieee ahaa
A:3 RATIONALIZATIONT Daydream.
.-...<.....
A.4 RATIONALIZATION2 Daydream
.........
A.5 RATIONALIZATIONS Daydream
.........
A'6 ROVING Daydreaiin
prin acusbeebs
ate uytees os
ALT RECOVERY? Daydream...
2 ain oer ee
ASS RECOVERY 34D ay Greats ois
3 whe oo cake seainas
A.S REVENGES Davdreamic oo jcc ode Gye a ale,
A; 10‘COMPUTER-SBERENDIPULY,
2 «05 uu cee ae
B

English Generation for Daydreaming
Brill

Br2

he

Generator.

aces

ee ee

Eee

B.1.1 The Form of Generational Knowledge
B.2
Subject Generation...
« «4 « <0 + 412 alk
Generational Templates. ox ¢ «store
eee
Diz . Wentarltancter ecco
a
co ee ce ee oe
B.2.2

Other Actions and States

E25 | GOAts mre rote eetee eect eee eg eee
B.2.4
B.2.5
B.2.6

B.3
B.4
B.5
Index

ou

280
282

283

References
A

eee
te Ro

Emotions
Attitudes
Beliefs

B.2.7—"Objects and Locations «2.5, O02
B.2.8 Persons
B.2.9 Other Concepts
Global Generation Alterations
Generation Pruning
Additional Generation eS a ee ae es UR ee

ia

EMRYT

ee

nyo gs

rt

List of Figures
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.0
2.8
2.9
2.10
2.11

TMIO LIONS ANAEOONCEENS: Utes
6 319 asta Sk as gle ah! oeaes pos)
Eimotuions AncrConcerns2
ee Bah se Fh s8 ehPa
Bawa
Emotions and-Conceris: 3 ipianie/o) Senses Sues
eae
DT
HMmopionstala: Concerns Ass
5.) fo er, eee ca heae
te, snheee ae
Emotions ne Concerns 1) a ose. 2 eee | ae.
UN ie ea
aes
PANOUOUS ana vCORCErIS ia ty ce ate abd Gav
ha Sua
ses
DAVURE AMM
Procediresy
a... haber sith Gn
aw ge
oe ke

40
40
41
41
42
42
44

3.1
3.2
3.3

Coal AKONOUUAV anes agua eile. se Mede. cea Soe pe he ee
ine Emotional Feedback System) «i. ..4..0n sce
s Gao
ee
The Emotional Daydreaming Goals.
« . <5. .05 2 2 tee
ts

58
62
63

4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9

Viannine, tree tor RIV BNGE Vg ot
tee do ee
88
Indexing, Ot Episodes Dy eHlles = si
5 8 eA
eee ee ae
89
Cases ineanalogical Planning 6 oo sceca 3S, cae ss ole
90
Planning treetor Rs VENGE2
2°... eye
ew ee
ee
92
Planning: Lree torent NGHS Goce So cnet ce Qn eee te
92
Analogies! Planning igsRECOVERY!
«=... 2% 2.5425 - 93
Partial iree tor RATIONALIZATION],
«22 32 esa eensot 94
101
Making Imaccessible Rules Accessible. ........-+--+-+-105
............
Failure
Regard
Social
a
for
Inference Chain

5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.9

Boe ee
SET enciniLyew: eneate Sika se eee aus. Soo ee
ee es
i892 cee a
Rule intersection tor RECOVERY3'..8)
Verification Episode for RECOVERY3 ...........-..-..ae
Lp leowe, DAY DREAMER: . 2.) 26 ace nr a
ABS
.....-..-.-.+.-.
Serendipity
vs.
Opportunistic Planning

12%
129
130
139
145

i

Basic Procedure Dependencies

........-+-+++++eeee>

178

Needsywith Subsumption States. 01.9...
. «cesses ss es ye he 34
driterleaving oli Concetns Rr ai iah Mics «es ys con's cs) ss eed dns 36
Meta-Planning/Universal Subgoaling ................
37
Mimotion- Driven’ Planitiaitgas ei
BO
ies os, as aw aie igs 38

ix

LIST OF FIGURES

1.2
7.3
7.4
7.9

Trée‘of Planning? Contexteinns
sa
4’ Aa Re eee
ee ee
Personal and Daydreaming Goal Contexts ........0.....
Revised Procedure Dependenciésiy,
<.. 2.2. 2
6 A weSoke eR
Further Revised Procedure Dependencies
.............

8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4
8.5
8.6
orth
8.8
8.9

Discerimimations Nets wt: ate
eke fee
ot eae ees
ee 196
Fully Redundant Discrimination Net ................
197
Redundant Discrimination Net with Delayed Expansion .... . 198
Network for: Spreading Activation oo... 0 os wpe ep ee Sy
Ss 201
Connectionist Net for Episodes: First Attempt ..........
205
Connectionist Net for Episodes: Second Attempt ......... 206
Connectionist Net for Episodes: Third Attempt ..........
207
Connectionist Net for Episodes: Fourth Attempt ......... 207
Intersection indexing. NOtrecns
Ghee ta trae aa
ot 5 eee
ee 209

11.1

Overdetermined

Stream of Consciousness’...

1%

180
186
187
192

22952.2: 280

List of Tables
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4

Positive Emotions in DAYDREAMER .. ..<% 2.2.22.
Negative Emotions insDAYDREAMER..........4%.56.4.
DAayGreamingAGoals ome. wet ek 0% oe% gered SAP mati e ewes
Comparison of Emotion Regulation Strategies ...........

54
54
59
83

4.1

Ordering: of Retrieved Mpisodes..

112

xl

aes

6.

ea

a

ee

es

ae

+ e bee
is

it

CW

SED ut it ©

tere =

ee Teme tacias og
SS

es

me wish

inet en

ho ;

2
a

_

For Robert

xill

and Diana

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This book is a revised version of a dissertation submitted to UCLA in March
1987 for the degree of doctor of philosophy in computer science.
First, I would like to thank my advisor Michael Dyer. This work would
not have existed without him: He created the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
at UCLA that enabled me and my fellow students to pursue our research. He
encouraged me to pursue daydreaming—a topic few others would have agreed
to. In the early stages of my research, he helped me clarify the significance of
daydreaming as a subject of investigation. Throughout the almost four years of
work on this topic, he provided ideas, guidance, and constant support. I also
thank him for emphasizing the importance of presenting our work to the outside
world—both at conferences and program demonstration sessions in the lab.
Second, I want to thank the other members of my committee for their valuable comments and suggestions: Margot Flowers, Judea Pearl, Kenneth Mark
Colby, and Robert Bjork. Kenneth Mark Colby was especially generous with
his time. I thank him for many useful meetings and discussions.
Third, I would like to thank the other members of the lab: Sergio Alvarado,
Stephanie August, Charles Dolan, Richard Feifer, Michael Gasser, Seth Goldman, Jack Hodges, Michael Pazzani, Alex Quilici, John Reeves, Ron Sumida,
Scott Turner, and Uri Zernik. Uri, Scott, and John read earlier drafts of this
book and provided helpful comments. I especially thank Uri for the many interesting and productive discussions we had on our respective research topics.
Fourth, I want to thank Janene McNeil from the UCLA psychology department who supplied me with a collection of daydream diaries she collected from
her subjects in a pilot study. I also thank those friends who told me about or
sent me their daydreams.
Fifth, for their efforts in keeping the Apollo workstations in the lab up and
running, I would like to thank Eve Schooler and Seth Goldman. I also thank
Bill Davis, Doris McClure, and other members of the Center for Experimental
Computer Science at UCLA for providing additional computing support. For
lab administrative assistance, I thank Anna Gibbons and Anne Finestone.
Sixth, I want to thank the following friends during my graduate school years
on the West Coast: Mark Joseph, Ann Gardner, Karen Lever, Patty Liu, Andy
Lust, Johanna Moore, Raya Palm, Ellen Perlman, Tony Thijssen, and Carrie
Young.
Seventh, I would like to thank my grandmother, Ilus Lobl, my great-aunt
Ellie Bermowitz, and my great-uncle Jack Bermowitz.
Finally, I want to thank my wonderful parents, Robert Mueller and Diana
Mueller, and my fantastic sister, Rachel Mueller-Lust.
This research was supported by a fellowship from Atlantic Richfield, a grant
from the Hughes Artificial Intelligence Center, an IBM Faculty Development
award, and a grant from the W. M. Keck Foundation.
XV

Preparation of the revision for publication as a book was made possible by
the Analytical Proprietary Trading unit of Morgan Stanley & Company in New
York. I would like to thank Barbara Bernstein and Carol Davidson at Ablex for
their efforts, and anonymous reviewers for helpful suggestions.

XV1

Chapter 1

Introduction
The field of artificial intelligence is concerned with the construction of computer
systems which exhibit intelligent behavior in order to augment and complement
our own human intelligence, and to understand more about how the human
mind works. Consider the human phenomenon of daydreaming: the spontaneous activity—carried out in a stream of thought—-of recalling past experiences, imagining alternative courses that a past experience might have taken,
and imagining possible future experiences. Why is daydreaming an interesting topic of study for artificial intelligence? On the face of it, daydreaming
may seem like a human shortcoming, a useless distraction from a task being
performed which would be undesirable in computer systems. But how can we
ignore an aspect of human thought which appears so frequently in everyday life?
For example:

e While driving home from work with the car radio on, you suddenly realize you have completely missed the last few minutes of the news report.
Instead of listening, you have been mentally replaying an event of the day
and altering it to how you would have liked it to come out. You think
about what you might have said or done, but didn’t.
e An important job interview is coming up. You have trouble concentrating
on your current task. Instead, you find yourself imagining the future event
again and again. You go over what you and others will say or do in that
situation, and you imagine things go—or don’t go—the way you would
like them to go.

e You are reading a book and are startled by the noisy cuckoo clock. You
realize that you have been lost in thought for minutes, following a chain of
experiences and associations triggered by the sentence or word you read
just before drifting off.

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

2

e You are sitting in a classroom and are bored with the material. You miss
the question which the instructor has just asked you because, in your
fantasy, you have been off driving in a convertible on the French Riviera,
wearing a scarf, your hair waving in the wind.

e When things don’t go as planned, you make yourself feel better by imagining how if they had gone as planned, you might have been even worse
off.
Most likely, some or all of the above experiences are familiar to the reader.
Since daydreaming is such a pervasive aspect of human experience (Pope, 1978;
J. L. Singer, 1975; Klinger, 1971), the following questions naturally arise: Why
do we daydream? How is daydreaming useful to us? What are the advantages
(and disadvantages) of daydreaming? If daydreaming serves a useful function in
humans, then might daydreaming not also be useful in a computer system? Do
we want our computers to daydream? Can a computer even be fully intelligent
without being able to daydream?

1.1

The DAYDREAMER

Program

This book presents a theory of human daydreaming implemented as a computer
program called DAYDREAMER. This program models the daydreaming (and to
a lesser extent, the overt behavior) of a human in the domain of interpersonal
relations and common everyday occurrences.
Ideally, DAYDREAMER would be a robot capable of moving around, performing actions, and communicating with humans and other robots in the real
world; this would enable the program to interact with and learn from a fertile
and often unpredictable environment just as human daydreamers do. However,
in order to construct such a robot, difficult problems in robotics, vision, and
speech understanding would have to be solved first (not to mention obtaining
and constructing the necessary hardware). Since these problems are outside
the scope of our work, DAYDREAMER is instead embedded within a simulated
world which models the real world of humans.
As input, DAYDREAMER takes descriptions of events in this world. As
output, DAYDREAMER describes both actions which it performs in this world
as well as its internal “stream of thought”—sequences of events in imaginary
past or future worlds—or daydreams. (A more precise definition of daydreaming

will be provided later on.)
Several sources of verbal reports of daydreaming—henceforth called
protocols—have been tapped in the construction of our theory and program:
(a) previously published protocols (Pope, 1978; Klinger, 1971; G. H. Green,

1923; Varendonck, 1921), (b) unpublished retrospective reports (see Ericsson
& Simon, 1984) collected from subjects by McNeil (1981), and (c) protocols
collected by the author from people via the methods of immediate retrospective

1.1.

THE DAYDREAMER

PROGRAM

3

report, retrospective report of memorable or classic daydreams, and typing on
a computer terminal concurrently with daydreaming.
DAYDREAMER was constructed in order to produce daydreams similar but
not identical to the obtained protocols. The daydreams produced by the program result from its particular knowledge structures and processes, which were
designed to correspond to a hypothetical female daydreamer in her twenties.
DAYDREAMER operates in two modes: daydreaming mode and performance
mode. In daydreaming mode, the program continuously daydreams until it runs
out of things to daydream about or is interrupted. In performance mode, the
program accepts input states or actions and produces output actions.
When DAYDREAMER is first started, the daydreamer has a job and is not
romantically attached.
Below is a portion of the I/O actually produced by
DAYDREAMER, showing:
1. input world states or actions (indicated by “Input”

and displayed in a

slanted type style)
2. output actions which modify the state of the world (indicated by “External

Action” and displayed in a bold type style)
3. the internal “stream of thought” of the program (displayed in a sans serif
type style)
Both input and output are in the form of English sentences.

LOVERS1
| want to be going out with someone. | feel really interested in going
out with someone. | want to be entertained. | feel interested in being
entertained. | have to go see a movie.

External action: I go to the Nuart.
Input: Harrison Ford is at the Nuart.

What do you know!

| have to have a conversation with him.

External action: I tell Harrison

Ford I would

like to know

the

time.

He does not think much of me because | am not well dressed.

| fail at

him thinking highly of me. | feel really embarrassed.
External action: I introduce myself to him.
Input: He introduces himself to me.

He has to be interested in me.
Maybe he thinks | am cute.

He cannot be going out with anyone.

External action: I tell him I like his movies.

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

4

He thinks highly of me. He is interested in me. Maybe he is not going
out with anyone. Maybe he wants to be going out with me.
External action:

I tell him

I would

like to have

dinner

with

him at a restaurant.

Input: He declines.

| fail at going out with him. | feel really angry at him.
External action:

I watch a movie at the Nuart.

| want to be going out with someone. | feel really interested in going
out with someone.
External action:

I go home.

| succeed at being entertained.

| feel amused.

In the above experience, called LOVERS1 for future reference, DAYDREAMER
first activates two goals: one to form a romantic relationship, and another to
satisfy a need for entertainment. She acts first on her entertainment goal by
performing an external action: going to see a movie at the Nuart Theater. There
she accidentally meets the actor Harrison Ford whom she has always liked; his
presence at the theater is provided as external input. Acting on behalf of her
goal to form a relationship, she asks him if he knows the time. Now she feels
embarrassed because she is not wearing her best clothes. In any case, she
introduces herself to him and he introduces himself to her. She then tells him
she enjoys his films and asks him if he would like to have dinner sometime.
Unfortunately, he turns her down. Her goal to form a relationship thus fails

and she is angry at him. She then watches the movie, resulting in the success of
her entertainment goal. After this experience, DAYDREAMER amuses herself
with the following revenge daydream:

REVENGE1
| study to be an actor. | am a movie star even more famous than he is.
| feel pleased. He is interested in me. He breaks up with his girlfriend.
He wants to be going out with me. He calls me up. | turn him down.
| get even with him. | feel pleased.

DAYDREAMER then tries to make herself feel better by generating the following
rationalization daydream:

RATIONALIZATIONI1
What if | were going out with him? He would need work. | remember
the time he had a job with Paramount Pictures in Cairo. He would go
to Cairo. Our relationship would be in trouble. | would go to Cairo. |
would lose my job at May Company. | feel relieved.

1.2.

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND ISSUES

5

DAYDREAMER is relieved about being turned down by Harrison Ford because
if she had ended up in a relationship with him, she would have lost her job.
Another rationalization is then generated:

RATIONALIZATION2
| remember the time my being turned down by Irving led to a success
by being turned down by him leading to succeeding at going out with
Chris. | go to Mom's. He goes to Mom's. | am going out with him. My
being turned down by Harrison Ford leads to me succeeding at going
out with Chris.
In the above daydream, DAYDREAMER imagines that as a result of being turned
down by Harrison Ford, she goes to Mom’s Bar and meets someone else. Further
rationalizations are produced:

RATIONALIZATION3
Anyway, | was well dressed because | was wearing a necklace. | feel less
embarrassed. Anyway, | do not think much of Harrison Ford. | feel less
embarrassed. | rationalize being turned down by him.
In the above daydream, DAYDREAMER

reduces her embarrassment about her

clothes by (a) thinking about the nice necklace she was wearing, and (b) deciding
she does not like Harrison Ford anyway.

ROVING1
| remember the time Steve told me he thought | was wonderful at
Gulliver's. | feel pleased. | remember the time | had a job in the
Marina. | remember the time Steve and | bought sunglasses in Venice
Beach.
In this daydream, DAYDREAMER diverts attention from negative emotions associated with being turned down by Harrison Ford to a pleasant past experience.
She is then reminded of two other related experiences. Further daydreams re-

sulting from LOVERSI1 will be presented and discussed in the following section.

1.2

Research

Objectives and Issues

The objective of the present work is to construct a model of daydreaming and
related phenomena using the computer as a tool. We seek to apply the techniques of artificial intelligence to the problem, to flesh out these techniques in
terms of particular knowledge structures and constructs, to extend these techniques where they fall short, and to develop new techniques. We seek to gain
new psychological insights, to raise new psychological issues, to generate new

6

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

hypotheses, and to suggest possible experiments for testing these hypotheses.
In sum, our goal is to investigate daydreaming from the standpoint of computer
modeling, and in so doing to advance the fields of both artificial intelligence and
psychology.
The fundamental hypothesis of our work is that daydreaming is useful for
humans, in particular, that it serves the following important functions: (a)

learning from imagined experiences, (b) creative problem solving, and (c) useful
interaction with emotions. In this section, we discuss these functions, how they
are useful in a computer system, and, specifically, how they are demonstrated
in DAYDREAMER. We present the associated research problems addressed by
the present work.

1.2.1

Learning from Imagined Experiences

Previous work in artificial intelligence has addressed learning from real experi-

ences: DeJong (1981), Carbonell (1983) and Kolodner, Simpson, and SycaraCyranski (1985) have investigated how behavior can be improved as a result
of previous experience; Schank (1982) and Dyer (1983a) have pointed out the
importance of learning from failure experiences. But in order to learn from a
given situation, why should one have to wait for that situation to come up in the
real world? It should be possible to learn from zmagined experiences in addition
to real ones. In fact, humans frequently daydream about hypothetical future
experiences (Pope, 1978; J. L. Singer, 1975, pp. 118-119, 1966; Klinger, 1971,
pp. 47-48; Rapaport, 1951, pp. 718-719; G. H. Green, 1923, pp. 16, 180). We
propose that this activity enables learning—or the useful modification of future
behavior—in several ways.
First, daydreaming enables the formation of intentions to perform certain
actions in the future. For example, in the following daydream, DAYDREAMER
thinks of a way she could find out Harrison Ford’s unlisted telephone number
in order to contact him again:

RECOVERY1
| have to ask him out. | have to know his unlisted telephone number.
| remember the time Alex knew Rich's unlisted telephone number by
logging into the TRW credit database. | ask Alex to look up Harrison
Ford's unlisted telephone number in the TRW credit database.

The next time DAYDREAMER sees Alex, she will ask him to help her find out
the actor’s telephone number.
Second, daydreaming enables decision-making by (a) exploring alternative
plans for achieving a goal, and then (b) forming an intention to carry out the
best such plan. McDougall (1923) proposes a similar function for imagination (of
which he considers daydreaming to be one form): “The essential and primary
function of imagination is to carry out the process of trial and error on the

1.2.

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND ISSUES

7

imaginary plane, to depict each situation and the consequences of each step of
action, before the action is accomplished or even begun” (p. 292).
Third, daydreaming enables preparation in the face of various contingencies
through (a) the exploration of alternative situations that might arise in trying
to achieve a goal, and (b) the formation of intentions to perform certain actions
should those situations arise. For example, before a job interview one may
daydream about possible questions of the interviewer and various responses to
those questions.
Fourth, daydreaming—when one is otherwise unoccupied with a task—
enables discovery of negative consequences of carrying out a future intention
that might not otherwise have been recognized. Then, once a negative consequence of a future intention has been discovered, the future intention may be
adjusted as appropriate, and tested through further daydreaming. Thus daydreaming provides an adaptive safety mechanism to avoid undesirable courses
of action. For example:

NEWSPAPER
| want to be entertained. | feel hopeful. | have to read the newspaper.
| have to grab the newspaper.
| go outside.

| get wet. | feel displeased. | fail at keeping dry.

What if | put on a raincoat? | go outside. | grab the newspaper.
the newspaper. ...

| read

| want to avoid getting wet. External action: I put on a raincoat.
I go outside. I grab the newspaper. I read the newspaper.
DAYDREAMER has the intention to go outside to get the newspaper. She then
imagines carrying out this intention. Since it is raining, she gets wet.’ As a
result of this negative consequence, she adjusts her intention and tests it out
through another daydream—she imagines putting on a raincoat before going
outside.
Why is this learning? Before the daydream, DAYDREAMER knew only that

(a) a plan to be at some location is to go to that location, and (b) one gets wet
if one is at some location and not wearing a raincoat while it is raining at that
location. After the daydream, the program also knows that a plan to be at some
location while it is raining at that location is to put on a raincoat and then go
to that location. In this case, the negative consequence of the plan happens to
be obvious to most people (but not to the program). In other cases, however,
the negative consequences may not be so obvious.
Fifth, by spending free time exploring possible future situations in the world,
daydreaming enables the discovery of negative consequences of a situation that
1The example of getting the newspaper while it is raining is borrowed
(1983).

from Wilensky

CHAPTER

8

1. INTRODUCTION

might not otherwise have been noticed. Consequently, daydreaming enables one
to take steps to prevent those negative consequences well in advance of the future
situation. Alternatively, daydreaming enables one to form the intention to take
certain steps as soon as the future situation arises, in order to prevent those

negative consequences from occurring. For example:

REPERCUSSIONS1
Input: There is an earthquake in Mexico City.

What if there is an earthquake in Los Angeles? My apartment collapses.
My possessions are destroyed. | am killed. | feel very worried.
| have to go to the doorway. | have to get insurance.

What if there is an earthquake in Los Angeles? | go to the doorway.
get hit by a falling plant. | get hurt. My possessions are destroyed.
feel very worried.

|
|

| have to move the plant away from the doorway. | have to buy insurance
from some company.

External action: I go to State Farm.

I pay Sally.

Input: Sally gives me the insurance.

| am insured. | feel very pleased.

DAYDREAMER imagines there is an earthquake, her apartment collapses, and
she is killed. In order to prevent this negative consequence of an earthquake, she
forms the intention to run to the doorway as soon as the earthquake begins. She
imagines carrying out this intention in another daydream. This time, however,
she is hit by a plant which is hung above the doorway. So she decides to move the
plant well before a possible future earthquake. Without exploring the possibility
of running to the doorway in a daydream, the need to move the plant might
never have been recognized.
Some Olympic gymnasts and divers prepare for performances by mentally

“running through” those performances in advance (Suinn, 1984). Thus, in humans, rehearsing future actions through daydreaming may increase the accessibility of planned actions and the skill with which they can be performed. (J.
R. Anderson, 1983, pp. 172-173, however, suggests that short distractions—
daydreams—about something other than a task may be useful to that task: He
hypothesizes that bringing an item out of short-term memory and then back in
again results in a strengthening of the long-term memory of that item; therefore, short distractions which remove an item from short-term memory and then

restore that item are useful in increasing retention of facts.)
Humans daydream not only about hypothetical future experiences, but
about hypothetical past experiences as well (Klinger, 1971, p. 301; Neisser,

1.2.

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND ISSUES

9

1982c, p. 14). After an experience, one often imagines alternative sequences of
events which might have led to different outcomes. We propose that daydreaming about imaginary variations of a past experience enables learning as a result of
that experience. By considering these alternative scenarios, one may learn better courses of action for use in future similar situations—or one may reinforce
the original course of action. For example, after LOVERS1, DAYDREAMER
generates the following daydream:

REVERSAL1
| feel embarrassed. What if | had put on nicer clothes? | would have
gone to the Nuart Theater. | would have asked him out. He would have
accepted. | feel regretful.

From this daydream, DAYDREAMER learns to wear nicer clothes when going
out, if she is looking to form a new relationship, as demonstrated in the following:

LOVERS2
| want to be going out with someone. | feel hopeful. | have to be
acquainted with someone. | have to go to the Nuart Theater. | want
to avoid someone having a negative attitude toward me. | put on nicer
clothes. | go to the Nuart Theater.
Input: Robert Redford is at the Nuart Theater.

... External action: I ask him out.
Input: He turns you down.

...

It is therefore proposed that learning, rather than being a one-shot event
in response to an external world experience, is an ongoing process carried out
in part during daydreaming. An external experience triggers any number of
daydreams from which one may learn and continue to learn if that experience
is later reinterpreted in light of new experiences and knowledge.
Daydream

Production

Are daydreams random? We assume not—at least not entirely—and therefore
DAYDREAMER must deal with the following issues:

e The triggering of daydreams:
place?

What

instigates a daydream in the first

e The generation of daydreams:
daydream generated?

Once triggered, how are the events of a

e The direction of daydreams: Since at any point in a daydream there may
be many directions for the daydream to proceed, how is one of those
directions selected?

CHAPTER

10

1. INTRODUCTION

Representation of the Interpersonal Domain

In order to produce daydreams, DAYDREAMER must be able to represent a
number of concepts in the domain of interpersonal relations, for example: “going
out with,” “breaks up with,” “turn him down,” “get even with,” and so on.
The program must have knowledge about what is required to initiate, maintain, and terminate relationships. For example, in LOVERS1, DAYDREAMER
attempts to form a relationship with Harrison Ford through appropriate actions
such as introducing herself to him, asking him out, and so on. In RATIONALIZATION1, DAYDREAMER recognizes that when the movie star leaves to shoot
a film in Egypt, their relationship is “in trouble.”
The program must be able to represent attitudes such as “interested in” and
to assess and modify attitudes. For example, in LOVERS1, DAYDREAMER
infers that the movie star does not “think much of” her; she later tells the star
she likes his movies in order to get him to have a more positive attitude toward
her.
Goals and Needs

Humans have many needs, from biological needs for oxygen, water, food, sex,
and shelter, to higher-level needs, such as for self-esteem, companionship, friendship, love, and sometimes also for material goods, money, achievement, a career,
and so on. Typically, when a need is unsatisfied (or when a satisfied state is
threatened), a goal is activated to satisfy that need (or preserve the satisfied
state). For example, in LOVERS1, DAYDREAMER activates goals to form a
relationship and to be entertained.
What collection of needs and goals should DAYDREAMER have? Is there a
basic set of needs from which all other needs derive? The answer is not simple
since even basic needs interact with each other. For example, satisfaction of the
need for money may enable satisfaction of the shelter need; satisfaction of the
need for friendship may contribute to satisfaction of the need for self-esteem.
Episodic Memory

Past personal and secondhand experiences are often the topic of daydreaming.
In order for DAYDREAMER to daydream about such experiences, it will have

to have something like a human
therefore address:

episodic memory (Tulving, 1972).

We must

e The representation of episodes: The program must first be given an appropriate representation for previous experiences.

e The storage of episodes: The program should then be able to enter new
experiences into memory, such as LOVERS1.

1.2.

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND ISSUES

11

¢ The retrieval of episodes: The program should then be able to retrieve
previous experiences appropriate to the current daydream or situation.
e The application of episodes: The program should then be able to make
use of a retrieved episode, to incorporate the episode into the events of a
daydream.
In RATIONALIZATIONI, for example, DAYDREAMER is reminded of
a previous secondhand experience—the time Harrison Ford “had a job with
Paramount Pictures in Cairo.” This experience is employed in the daydream
being generated.

Learning Through Daydreaming
After a daydream, what remains in memory? How does what remains in memory
modify subsequent behavior? We must address the following issues in machine
learning via daydreaming:
e Influence of daydreaming on future external behavior: How are intentions
formed in daydreaming later recalled and acted upon? How are daydreams stored in memory and later applied in generating external behavior? In REVERSAL1, for example, DAYDREAMER imagines she wore
nicer clothes when going to the movies, and that this led to a success.
Later, in LOVERS2, DAYDREAMER remembers to wear better clothes.
How are daydreams evaluated and selected? How are realistic daydreams
distinguished from unrealistic ones? For example, as a result of RATIONALIZATION1, should or will DAYDREAMER avoid movie stars in the
future?

e Influence of daydreaming on future daydreaming: How are daydreams
stored in memory and later applied in generating new daydreams? For
example, suppose DAYDREAMER goes to work and her boss fires her.
DAYDREAMER is then reminded of REVENGE1 which assists in the production of the following daydream:

REVENGE3
| remember the time | got even with Harrison Ford for turning me
down by studying to be an actor, being a star even more famous
than he is, him calling me up, him asking me out, and me turning

him down. Say | am a powerful executive. Agatha offers me a job.
| turn down her offer. | get even at her for firing me. | feel pleased.

CHAPTER

12

1.2.2

1. INTRODUCTION

Creative Problem Solving

Consider the traditional paradigm for problem solving in the field of artificial
intelligence: Given a collection of operators, an initial state, and a description
of a goal state, carry out a process of search in order to find a sequence of
operators for transforming the initial state into a goal state. Programs based
on this approach, such as GPS (Newell, Shaw, & Simon, 1957; Ernst & Newell,
1969) and STRIPS (Fikes & Nilsson, 1971) are given a problem to solve, perform
the search in order to generate a solution or solutions, and then terminate. The
generation of solutions to problems in human daydreaming, on the other hand,
has three important properties which are not captured by this view of problem
solving.
First, each time one daydreams about a problem, different information may
be available that will enable a different and possibly better solution. That is, new
solutions can be generated in light of new experiences. We propose that daydreaming occurs in the context of a memory which is constantly being updated—
called a “dynamic memory” by Schank (1982). Each time a problem is examined, it may be moved one step closer to its solution; daydreaming thus enables
the ongoing revision of previous solutions. For example, in RECOVERY3, the
scheming to find out Harrison Ford’s telephone number is advanced by one step.
Now DAYDREAMER needs to find out where the actor went to college. A classic example of how the production of creative products involves incremental
revision is provided by Beethoven’s progressive modification of the first eight
measures of the second movement of his Third Symphony (see, for example,
Dallin, 1974, pp. 4-5).
Second, daydreaming often explores possibilities which are unrealistic or fanciful at first glance, but which can sometimes be incrementally modified into
realistic, useful solutions to problems. In particular, scenarios are pursued in
daydreaming which might not have otherwise been pursued either because of
physical, social, cultural, or other constraints, or simply because their utility to
some problem is not immediately evident. Humans daydream about possibilities such as: What would it be like if I were a laboratory mouse? What if I
were on Mars? What if I found out that I was dreaming right now? What if I
could fly? Daydreaming is thus a natural instance of such explicit techniques for
improving creativity as “brainstorming” (Osborn, 1953) and “lateral thinking”
(de Bono, 1970), which encourage one to generate wild ideas even if they seem
unrelated to the problem being solved. DAYDREAMER, for example, produces
the following daydream:

RECOVERY2
| have to ask him out. | have to call him. | have to know his telephone
number. He has to tell me his telephone number. | have to know where
he lives. Suppose he tells someone else his telephone number. What do
you know! This person has to tell me his telephone number. He has to

1.2.

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND ISSUES

13

tell this person his telephone number. He has to want to be going out
with this person. He has to believe that this person is attractive. He
believes that Karen is attractive. He is interested in her. He breaks up
with his girlfriend. He wants to be going out with her. He wants her
to know his telephone number. She tells him she would like to know
his telephone number. He tells her his telephone number. | have to
tell her that | want to know his telephone number. | call her. | tell her
that | want to know his telephone number. She tells me his telephone
number. | call him. | ask him out.
Here DAYDREAMER wishes to find out Harrison Ford’s telephone number. Instead of Harrison Ford telling DAYDREAMER his number, it is imagined that
he tells someone else his number. Whether or not this possibility will help DAYDREAMER find out the actor’s telephone number is not clear at first. However,
this possibility then proceeds to be worked into a potential solution: DAYDREAMER will get her attractive and rich (and happily married) friend Karen
to ask Harrison Ford for his telephone number, and then give it to her.
Third, while daydreaming about one of several ongoing problems, one sometimes stumbles into a solution to another one of those problems.
That is,
serendipity—the accidental recognition and exploitation of relationships among
problems—often occurs during, and as a result of, daydreaming. For example:

RECOVERY3
| want to be entertained.

| feel interested in being entertained.

External action: I go outside.

I grab the mail.

| have the UCLA Alumni directory.
Input: Carol Burnett went to UCLA.
Input: Carol’s telephone number is in the UCLA Alumni directory.

What do you know!
External action: I read her telephone
Alumni directory.

number

in the UCLA

| succeed at being entertained. | feel amused. | have to read Harrison
Ford’s telephone number in the Alumni directory. | have to know where
he went to college. | remember the time | knew where Brooke Shields
went to college by reading that she went to Princeton University in
People magazine. | have to read where he went to college in People
magazine.

...

DAYDREAMER receives an alumni directory from UCLA which happens to
contain the number of Carol Burnett. Since DAYDREAMER still has an active
goal to contact Harrison Ford, she realizes that this experience is applicable to
finding out his telephone number: DAYDREAMER, now has to obtain a copy of

CHAPTER

14

1. INTRODUCTION

the alumni directory from Harrison Ford’s college (if any). Even if in fact there
is no such directory, this may lead to other ideas such as finding the number of
his agent in the guild directory.
Sometimes a reminding and serendipity are simultaneously triggered by
noticing a physical object in one’s environment, as in the following:

COMPUTER-SERENDIPITY
Input: Computer.

What do you know! | remember the time Harold and | broke the ice by
me being a member of the computer dating service, and by him being a
member of the computer dating service. | knew his telephone number
by the dating service employee telling me Harold’s telephone number. |
have to be a member of the dating service. He has to be a member of
the dating service. | have to pay the dating service employee.

LAMPSHADE-SERENDIPITY
Input: Lampshade.

What do you know! | remember the time Karen thought highly of the
comedian because she thought he was funny. She thought he was funny
because he wore a lampshade.
... |have to wear a lampshade.

...

In each case, a physical object provided as input leads to recall of an episode
related to a currently active goal of DAYDREAMER: to form a new relationship.
The episode is then applied to the goal. Although either the goal or the physical
object alone may be insufficient to retrieve an appropriate episode, the two in
conjunction are sufficient. The solution resulting from such a combination is
serendipitous because the retrieved episode is not directly related to the active
problem, and was not previously known as a possible solution to that problem.
For example, the episode retrieved in LAMPSHADE-SERENDIPITY does not
involve a goal to form a relationship with someone. Rather, it involves the goal
to be entertained at a nightclub. Nonetheless, it is recognized as applicable,
albeit indirectly, to the goal to form a relationship with someone.
Despite the fundamental importance of creativity to human intelligence, this
unique ability of humans has rarely been investigated by artificial intelligence
researchers.” This is understandable in light of the difficulty of the problem—
creativity and the creative process are indeed quite complex. However, there
are certain needless limitations of most present-day artificial intelligence programs which make creativity difficult or impossible: They are unable to consider
bizarre possibilities and they are unable to exploit accidents. Several researchers
?Some notable exceptions are AM (Lenat, 1976), BACON (Langley, Bradshaw, & Simon,
1983), and TALE-SPIN (Meehan, 1976), considered in Chapter 5.

1.2.

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND ISSUES

15

(see, for example, Sacerdoti, 1974, 1977; Sussman, 1975) have addressed the incremental refinement of slightly incorrect or incomplete solutions. However, they
have not addressed the generation and application of highly fanciful sequences

of events such as those found in human daydreaming. Wilensky (1983) has pro-

posed the use of “meta-planning” for dealing with multiple problems. Still, this
mechanism does not address how a solution to one problem may accidentally
suggest a solution to another problem.

Modeling Everyday

Creativity

Our task here is not to account for the creative products of great artists, writers,
scientists, and so on. Rather, we seek to address everyday creativity—so called
for the following reasons: First, all humans are creative at some time or another
(J. L. Adams, 1974; Wertheimer, 1945). As Polya (1945) puts it: “A great
discovery solves a great problem but there is a grain of discovery in the solution
of any problem.” (p. v) Second, the problems of interest in daydreaming are
the everyday topics of interpersonal relations, employment, and the like (J. L.
Singer, 1975). Third, creative solutions occur on a daily basis in daydreaming
(J. L. Singer, 1981; Klinger, 1971, pp. 217-221; Wallas, 1926, pp. 104-105;
Varendonck, 1921, pp. 213-215) and are thus not restricted to exceptional
individuals. Of course, the mechanisms which we will propose for everyday
creativity may also be involved in more profound forms of creativity.
The following research issues must be addressed:

e the generation of fanciful and realistic solutions
e the incremental modification of solutions
e the use of past experience in generating new solutions

e the recognition and exploitation of accidental relationships among problems

e the evaluation of solutions
e the storage of solutions
e the application of solutions in the real world

Poincaré (1908/1952) and others (Wallas, 1926) have discussed the following
phenomenon in creativity: setting aside a problem for a period of time (“incu-

bation” )seems to increase the chances for a later insight (“illumination”). How
will our theory address this phenomenon?

CHAPTER

16

1. INTRODUCTION

Perpetual Daydreaming
Humans seem to be able to generate an endless series of novel daydreams. Although it has not reached this point so far, eventually we would like DAYDREAMER to be a sort of computational perpetual motion machine, able to
daydream continuously as humans do. How much knowledge do we have to put
into our program to get it to daydream endlessly or for a long time?
Of course, humans are constantly taking in new experiences which provide
a new source of material for daydreaming. Even a human might run out of
things to daydream about if not provided with input; subjects participating in
sensory deprivation experiments report visual hallucinations (Bexton, Heron, &
Scott, 1954) rather than normal daydreams. Will a daydreaming computer also
require new input? If not provided with input, would the program eventually
reach a limit point at which time it repeats the same daydreams over and over?
It is easy to construct a program which generates superficially different daydreams. One can imagine any number of schemes for generating daydreams
which are trivial variations on previous daydreams, such as changing the names
of all the characters in a previous daydream. However, constructing a program
which continuously generates truly novel daydreams is very difficult. The daydreams of such a computer program must influence future daydreams in ways
which are unpredictable to the programmer (since the only way for the programmer to predict an endless sequence of novel daydreams is by running the

program itself).
Is it possible for any closed information-processing device to generate new
and useful combinations forever? So far, of course, the universe has not exhausted its evolutionary possibilities. Daydreaming humans and computers have
the benefit of outside input to enhance their daydreaming. But is it always a
benefit? In what ways are creative processes aided or hindered by outside input?

1.2.3.

Emotions

Previous artificial intelligence research in problem solving (see, for example,
Fikes & Nilsson, 1971; Wilensky, 1983) has ignored the role of emotions. How
might emotions be useful in a problem-solving program? Certainly it would be
a disadvantage, say, for a theorem prover to become so angry about not being
able to prove a theorem one way that it gave up trying other ways. But future intelligent problem-solving systems will not be directed toward single goals
specified in advance by the user. Consider the example of a household robot:
Such a system may have a number of ongoing goals, such as keeping its users
happy and safe, answering the door, answering the phone, cleaning the house,
preparing meals, and so on. The system will have to activate goals on its own,
in response to the environment. When several goals are active simultaneously,
the system will have to decide which to work on first. Emotions are one mechanism for selecting from among multiple goals: (a) Emotions determine the fecus

1.2.

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND ISSUES

17

of attention in processing, and (b) various events during processing in turn influence emotions. For example, when a problem-solving system anticipates a
future failure, a negative emotion is produced. This negative emotion in turn
motivates a goal to avoid the failure. This goal will compete for processing
time with other goals motivated by other emotions. Emotions provide a partial
alternative to other proposed mechanisms for coping with multiple goals, such

as “universal subgoaling” (Laird, 1984) and “meta-planning” (Wilensky, 1983).
Previous computer models of human emotions have addressed the following:

the emotional responses of a paranoid patient to a psychiatrist’s questions and
the influence of emotional state on the patient’s subsequent verbal behavior
(Colby, 1975); the emotional responses of a person to real-world situations and
their influence on later behavior (Pfeifer, 1982); and the comprehension by a

reader of the emotional reactions of story characters (Dyer, 1983b).

These

models all assume that a single emotional response results from an event in the
world. However, in humans, an entire sequence of daydreams and corresponding
emotions may result from an event, perhaps at last resting on a final emotion.
One must therefore account not only for the relationship between emotions and
events in the external world, but also between emotions and internal events or
daydreams. Our work addresses how emotions result from imagined as well as
real events.
Daydreaming interacts with emotions in a useful way: In humans, daydreaming is often concerned with the reduction or elimination of negative emotions
resulting from a past failure (Varendonck, 1921, pp. 249-250; J. L. Singer, 1975;
Izard, 1977, pp. 339, 398). Thus, daydreaming enables one to feel better. In
effect, failures result in a form of cognitive dissonance (Festinger, 1957) which
must somehow be reduced. DAYDREAMER models this human function of daydreaming: For example, in RATIONALIZATION1 the failure is rationalized and
the disappointment reduced through the generation of a daydream demonstrating that going out with Harrison Ford would be undesirable. In REVENGE1,
DAYDREAMER achieves revenge against the movie star, resulting in a positive
emotion. In ROVING1, DAYDREAMER shifts the topic to a more pleasant
episode.
Of course, sometimes an increase, rather than a decrease, of negative emotion results from daydreaming about a failure. This is also modeled in DAYDREAMER: For example, in REVERSAL1, DAYDREAMER regrets not having
worn nicer clothes.

Modeling Emotions
A potential problem arises in the computer modeling of emotions: Emotions.
are subjective experiences felt by humans whereas computers are presumably
not able to feel. An assumption of the present work is that it is possible, in
principle, to model abstractly the interaction of emotions and (external and
internal) behavior without actually getting the computer to feel, whatever that

CHAPTER

18

might mean.

1. INTRODUCTION

(The philosophical issues involved here are discussed in greater

detail in Chapter 10.)
Given this assumption, the following research issues must be addressed:

e Representation of emotions: How do we represent emotions such as the
“embarrassed,” “angry,” and “pleased” which appear in the daydreams
reproduced above?
e Initiation and modification of emotions in response to real and imagined
(daydreamed) events: What rules govern the generation of emotional responses in daydreaming? In RATIONALIZATION1, for example, a positive emotion results from what would normally be considered a negative
experience by DAYDREAMER—losing her job. Why is this?
e Influence of emotions on daydreaming and behavior. How do emotions,
such as the “angry” emotion of LOVERS1, modify processing? If this
emotion resulted in no modification of the behavior of DAYDREAMER,
then there would be no reason to have it.
e Emotion regulation: What strategies do humans employ for generating
daydreams such as RATIONALIZATION1 which enable one to feel better?
Why is it necessary to feel better in the first place—for humans, and
possibly even for computers?

1.3.

Foundations

of DAYDREAMER

So far we have seen that daydreaming is a pervasive aspect of human experience
and fundamentally related to human learning, creative problem solving, and
emotions. But is not daydreaming then too all-encompassing, too difficult a
research problem to undertake?
In this section, we present (a) the simplifying assumptions which have been
imposed in order to facilitate the difficult task of constructing a theory of daydreaming and associated computer program, and (b) a definition of the phenomenon of daydreaming to be addressed by our work.

1.3.1

Excluded

Phenomena

Some daydreaming consists of an interior monologue (J. L. Singer, 1975) in
which one comments to oneself on the current situation or attempts to solve a
personal problem by silently talking to oneself. Although the output of DAYDREAMER is in English, our theory and program do not address verbal daydreaming. Rather, the program generates verbal protocols of nonverbal, conceptual, and emotional daydreaming. Modeling of the generation of protocols
itself is not of primary concern to us in the present work. English output is employed to make the stream of thought easily accessible to the human observer of

1.3.

FOUNDATIONS

OF DAYDREAMER

19

the program. The English generator of DAYDREAMER functions merely as an
output filter—it has no influence upon the content of daydreaming, unlike concurrent verbalization in humans which most likely does modify and slow down
daydreaming (Pope, 1978). Instead of an English generator, DAYDREAMER
might have employed an output module to produce graphical animations of its
daydreams. For example, the representation for transfer of location (PTRANS)
would result in a little person walking from one place to another on the screen;
locations such as home, work, and the Nuart Theater would be represented
graphically; and so on. Such output graphics would have had no impact on
daydreaming.
Our theory does not address mental imagery or the quasisensory experiences
which are often a part of daydreaming (J. L. Singer & Antrobus, 1972). Is this
simplification justified? We must distinguish the erperience of imagery from
imagery representations: The experience of imagery escapes objective definition
as does any inherently subjective phenomenon (Dennett, 1978, pp. 174-189;
Nagel, 1974). Imagery representations, however, may be defined as knowledge
structures which enable operations such as three-dimensional rotation (Shepard
& Metzler, 1971) or the inference of spatial relations among objects from English
sentences (Waltz & Boggess, 1979). Imagery representations may be essential to
certain kinds of daydreaming: an artist or architect, for example, has detailed

visual representations (Arnheim, 1974) which may enable daydreaming about
artistic or architectural objects, just as a composer may have detailed musical
representations (L. B. Meyer, 1956).
Imagery representations do not appear essential in the domain of interest to
DAYDREAMER, that of interpersonal relations. We choose to ignore the effects
of the visualization of real or imaginary events—whatever those might turn out
to be—and concentrate on the conceptual and abstract emotional content of daydreaming. Although the daydream protocols we have consulted in constructing
our theory sometimes refer to visual images, imagery representations have not
been necessary to account for such daydreams. Varendonck (1921) came to the
conclusion that “the thought associations, which are rendered in words when
-we succeed in becoming conscious of our fancy, are the principal part of the
phantasy, the visual images only the illustrations” (p. 74, emphasis removed).
DAYDREAMER does not account in detail for daydreams (or external experiences) involving conversations. Nor does our theory account for daydreams
involving arguments.
Despite the inherently phenomenological nature of daydreaming, DAYDREAMER is not a detailed theory of the phenomenology of inner experience.
Thus our theory does not account for the subjective feeling states of the stream
of consciousness, including the altered state of consciousness which often accompanies daydreaming. This is a point of departure for addressing the larger
problem: As we construct more and more detailed conceptual representations,
we may find that we are increasingly able to account for diverse aspects of subjective experience. Another largely subjective aspect which is not addressed is

CHAPTER

20

1. INTRODUCTION

the distinction between directed, voluntary, intentional thought and undirected,
involuntary, unintentional thought.

The theory does not address metacognition (Flavell, 1979) or the knowledge
and thoughts people have about their own thoughts and thought processes. Although one may observe one’s daydreams and consciously develop new strategies
for daydreaming, this phenomenon is not addressed in the current work.
The theory does not account for development of daydreaming in childhood
(J. L. Singer, 1975, pp. 123-148; Klinger, 1971; G. H. Green, 1923). However,
we are concerned with iearning through daydreaming.
The theory does not account for nonconscious thoughts and the influence of
nonconscious thoughts on the conscious stream of thought.
For concreteness, DAYDREAMER is arbitrarily chosen to be a young heterosexual female. This makes little difference in the program since we make
no attempt to model age, gender differences, or differences in sexual preference
(although it does make a difference in the concrete details of the daydreams

which the program produces).

1.3.2

Definition of Daydreaming

In order to construct a computational theory of a particular phenomenon, it is
necessary to have a precise definition of that phenomenon. People have different ideas about what the words and expressions “daydreaming,” “daydream,”
“fantasy,” “reverie,” “stream of consciousness,” and “stream of thought” refer
to. In this section, we examine previous attempts to define human daydreaming
and related phenomena, and then we present our own definitions. (A detailed
review of past work in daydreaming is provided in Chapter 9.)
J. L. Singer (1975) describes daydreaming as a shift of attention from the
external environment or task being performed toward an internal sequence of
events, memories, or images of future events which have varying degrees of
likelihood of occurring. Daydreaming often ends with an awakening sensation
(Varendonck, 1921, pp. 154-165; G. H. Green, 1923, p. 25)—either as a result
of some environmental stimulus or a sudden awareness of being lost in thought.
However, as Klinger (1971) notes, daydreaming may also be freely intermixed
with task-related thought—in such cases there is no clear distraction followed
by daydreaming followed by awakening.
In response to earlier conceptions of daydreaming as stimulus-independent
and task-irrelevant thought (J. L. Singer, 1966; Antrobus, J. L. Singer, & Greenberg, 1966), Klinger (1978) points out that undirected thought—another property identified with daydreaming—may be stimulus-dependent and, conversely,
directed thought may be stimulus-independent.
Klinger. therefore proposes
that thought be characterized along the following four conceptually independent dimensions: undirected vs. directed, stimulus-independent vs. stimulusdependent, fanciful vs. realistic, and integrated vs. degenerate.

1.3.

FOUNDATIONS

OF DAYDREAMER

21

Directedness refers to the degree to which thought is under deliberate, voluntary control. In directed thought, one has the impression that one is consciously
steering the stream of thought, whereas in undirected thought the stream of
thought seems to steer itself. Stimulus dependence refers to the degree to which
thought is directly related to the external environment or current task situation. Realism refers to the likelihood or plausibility of depicted events or
situations. Integrated vs. degenerate distinguishes regular thoughts from more
bizarre, dreamlike, or nonsensical thoughts which sometimes intrude into waking
thought. Degenerate thoughts are similar to the hypnagogic thoughts present
at the onset of sleep (Maury, 1878; S. Freud, 1900/1965; Silberer, 1909/1951;

Foulkes, 1966).
Although the classical daydream is undirected, stimulus-independent, fanciful, and integrated, daydreaming is capable of having any values along the above
dimensions. It would serve no purpose to rule out, say, a directed, stimulusdependent, and fanciful stream of thought, or an undirected, stimulus-dependent
and realistic stream of thought, as instances of daydreaming.
Daydreaming may be decomposed into segments consisting of a coherent

sequence of events or having distinct thematic content (Klinger, 1971).

Day-

dreaming shifts from segment to segment (Pope, 1978); segments vary in length
and need not run to their natural completion—each segment transition is in
effect a distraction from one segment to the other. Hereafter, when we speak of
a daydream or a fantasy, we mean such a segment.
Daydreaming, therefore, is not as homogeneous in content over time as some
might think. Rather, daydreaming is similar to stream of consciousness thought

(James, 1890a).

However, the stream of consciousness is composed of a rich

and varied collection of subjective phenomena including sensory perceptions,
imagery, feelings, memories, drug-induced and meditative states, and so on
(Ornstein, 1973; Tart, 1969; Pope & J. L. Singer, 1978b). For the purposes of
the present work, we must limit our investigation to some well-defined subset of
the contents of conscious thought. We choose a subset consisting of the following
frequent components of daydreaming:

e emotional states
e recalled past events

e imagined variations on past events
e imagined future events
We rule out degenerate thoughts, imagery, and other consciousness phenomena from consideration (in accordance with the previous discussion). We also
rule out metacognition. Since daydreaming is an event performed internally, an
objective definition of daydreaming must refer to external behavior, in particular, to verbal protocols. (A detailed argument for this point is presented in
Chapter 10.)

CHAPTER

22

1. INTRODUCTION

Accordingly, human daydreaming is defined as any sequence of thoughts reported in a verbal protocol, where thoughts are composed of self attitudes, goals,
and emotions, beliefs about the thoughts of others, beliefs about world states
and events, hypothetical past, present, or future thoughts of varying degrees of
realism, and memories of past thoughts. This is a recursive definition: “Hypothetical thoughts,” for example, refers to hypothetical self attitudes, goals, and
emotions, hypothetical beliefs about the thoughts of others, and hypothetical
beliefs about world states and events; these cases correspond to daydreaming
about imaginary past or future events. For simplicity, we rule out hypothetical
hypothetical thoughts (i.e., hypothetical thoughts about hypothetical thoughts)
and hypothetical meinories (although such thoughts are possible in humans).
However, memories of past hypothetical thoughts are not ruled out: This is the
case of recalling prior imagined events. But memories of memories are also ruled
out for simplicity.
Our definition incorporates neither beliefs about self thought processes nor
the notion of directed (vs. undirected) thought—two requirements for metacognition, not explored in the current work. Also, note that no mention is made of
the dependence or independence of daydreaming upon current world states and

events—the stimulus-dependence dimension of Klinger.
Daydreaming is restricted to verbal protocols for convenience only. We certainly would not wish to claim that a person or animal unable to communicate
using language does not daydream. From other behaviors it may be possible to
infer beliefs about world states and events, thoughts about hypothetical events,
and so on. In fact, Griffin (1981) presents evidence which suggests that animals
may daydream. He writes:
[A] type of mental experience that may occur in non-human animals
is belief that something has happened or will happen in the future.

...{A]nimals might experience thoughts roughly described in the
following words: ...A cottontail rabbit, “If I run into this briar
patch, that big, threatening animal won’t catch and hurt me.” ... (p.
15)

William James (quoted by Jung, 1916) writes:
Our thought consists for the great part of a series of images, one of
which produces the other; a sort of passive dream-state of which the
higher animals are also capable. ...(p. 21, emphasis in original)

However, McDougall (1923) writes:
Animals, if they are confronted by a problem, solve it, if at all,
ambulando, in the course of action; they do not sit down and think
out a plan .... Such planning, such purposive deliberation, would
be the principal condition of the natural man’s superiority to the

animals. (p. 208)

1.4.

DAYDREAM PROTOCOL

ANALYSIS

23

Although the phrase “stream of consciousness” is normally a broad expression which includes all the subjective phenomena of consciousness (and thus
encompasses daydreaming as we have defined it), we define stream of consciousness thought here as one kind of daydreaming, in particular, as any daydreaming
which contains only segments of relatively short duration. The term “scenario”
is used to mean a sequence of thoughts as defined above.
Some readers might use the word “daydreaming” to refer to a narrower or
otherwise different range of mental phenomena. Why did we choose this word
to describe the subject of our research? We might have instead called it, for
example, “spontaneous fanciful and realistic past and future scenario exploration
with emotional responses and recall of past experiences.” On the other hand,
“daydreaming” is short, memorable, and has been used by psychologists to mean
just the phenomenon we are interested in.

1.4

Daydream

Protocol Analysis

How can we obtain data on the content of the stream of consciousness? Daydreaming is unlike most other human activities which artificial intelligence researchers attempt to model, since it is a behavior which is not visible externally.
The fact that there is no apparent “I/O” while a person is daydreaming presents
several problems for us: How do we know when a person is daydreaming? Given
that a person is daydreaming, how can we find out what that person is daydreaming about? Under what circumstances are people able to remember their
daydreams? How can we hope to record a phenomenon as varied as the stream
of consciousness? In this section, we review methods for gathering data about
and analyzing daydreaming which have been used in the past.

1.4.1

Retrospective Reports

Retrospective reports involve the description of a previous stream of thought as
it is recalled from memory. Varendonck (1921) obtained many retrospective
‘reports of his own daydreams. He would start from the end of a daydream and
work backward—in a similar fashion to when two people attempt to discover
how a particular topic was reached in a conversation:

I try to retrace, step by step, all the ideas which have succeeded one
another on the screen of my fore-consciousness, but not at random.

Usually I start from the last link (which I at once write down) and
try to recapitulate the last but one, and so on .... The whole process
requires some practice ....(p. 29)
Foulkes (1985, p. 83) similarly observes that the last portion of a night dream
is a more effective cue for retrieval of the remainder of the dream than other
content

cues.

24

CHAPTER

1. INTRODUCTION

Here is a portion of one of Varendonck’s retrospective daydream reports:

Shall I get my book and read, or shall I continue to think about Miss
X.? But what is the good of thinking about her? And what should
I say to my children to explain why I prefer her to Miss Y., to whom
they seem to incline? (Here my imagination reproduced before my
mental eye an occurrence which took place the day before yesterday:
Miss Y. is in my home with two members of her family; we see them
out, and at the front door we all repeat the same remarks. This
recollection is interrupted by the thought:) Miss X. looks younger
than Miss Y. But the latter seems so attached to her father that I
should have to detach her from him before she could really become
attached to me. I might let her read some works on psycho-analysis.
That might help. But how could I make her realize that I am not
any more the simple teacher of fifteen years ago? For I remember
that she once said in my presence that she would never marry an
insignificant man. I could let her read one of my publications. I
might start by sending her an order written on one of my visitingcards that bears my academic title. By the way, I must not forget
to send a card of congratulation to my friend V. on the occasion of
his election as a member of the Flemish Academy. ...(Varendonck,
1921, p. 79, emphasis removed)

We assume that daydreaming consists of the continual addition (and removal) of items into short-term memory.
A “memory trace” is a (possibly
partial) series of snapshots of the state of short-term memory. Retrospective reports may be generated immediately, while the memory trace of the daydream
is still in short-term memory, or later by retrieving the trace from long-term
memory (M. K. Johnson & Raye, 1981; Ericsson & Simon, 1984, pp. 10-20).
Retrieval of daydream traces from long-term memory, however, is subject to at
least two problems. First, if the daydream is recalled it will be subject to the
same kinds of confusions, distortions, and omissions which other memories are
subject to (F. C. Bartlett, 1932; Neisser, 1967, 1982b; Loftus, 1975).

Second, it may be difficult to recall the daydream at all. Smirnov (1973)
performed studies in which subjects were asked to report on their stream of
thought during particular episodes (such as walking to the office) which had
occurred an hour or two earlier. Most of the consciousness material which subjects were able to recall was directly related to the activity being performed at
the time. However, subjects felt that other material had been forgotten. Why

might daydreams be forgotten? S. Freud (1900/1965) proposes that the forgetting of dreams—and presumably also daydreams—is caused by the resistance
created by repression. A similar view is adopted by G. H. Green. Ericsson
and Simon (1984, p. 151), however, propose the following account of Smirnov’s
results: When the content of internal experience is unrelated to the task being
performed, memory connections are not formed between the internal experience

1.4.

DAYDREAM PROTOCOL ANALYSIS

25

events and the task events (especially when the task is a routine one, such as
driving to work) and therefore the subject will be unable to recall those internal experiences when the task is used as a retrieval cue. They propose (p. 19)
that retrospective reports be obtained immediately after a given thought stream,
while it is still unnecessary to give specific retrieval cues—presumably, appropriate retrieval cues are already present in short-term memory. Varendonck (1921)
similarly writes: “my memory is very deficient as regards my day-dreams, and
for this reason I retrace and register them immediately if I think they may be

useful.”

(p. 214) (However, at other times [p. 327] Varendonck claims to have

no trouble recalling daydreams.) One way of generating retrieval cues long after
the fact is to ask subjects whether they can recall ever experiencing a particular daydream (for example, “have you ever imagined walking on the ceiling?”).
One method of gathering retrospective reports, the 400-item Imaginal Processes

Inventory (IPI) of J. L. Singer and Antrobus (1972), operates in just this fashion.
1.4.2

Think-Aloud

Protocols

Retrospective reports rely on memory and so are not always accurate: similar
internal experiences may be confused. However, they do have the advantage
of not interfering with the process itself. In the think-aloud protocols, first
employed extensively by researchers interested in problem solving (Bloom &
Broder, 1950), the subject verbalizes the stream of thought as it is taking place.
Several investigators (Pope, 1978; Klinger, 1971; Antrobus & J. L. Singer, 1964)
have used think-aloud protocols in examining spontaneous stream of consciousness thought. The experiments of Pope (1978) have suggested that think-aloud
protocols may inhibit the subject or slow down and thus modify the stream of
thought. Specifically, he found that the duration of thought segments relating
to a particular theme or topic lasted about 30 seconds when thinking aloud,
whereas when the subject was not thinking aloud, thought segments—which
were indicated by pressing a button—lasted only about 5 or 6 seconds.
Think-aloud protocols derive from the method of free association used by S.

Freud (1900/1965) in interpreting the night dreams of patients. In this method,
patients were instructed to verbalize any thoughts coming to mind in connection
with a given element in a dream, no matter how irrelevant, absurd, meaningless,
or unpleasant to the patient. The purpose of free association was to uncover,
and eventually remove, a pathological idea underlying the patient’s problems.

Reik (1948) gives a transcript of his own free associations, of which we reproduce

a portion below in order to show the similarity between what has been called
free association by psychoanalysts and what we are here calling daydreaming
and stream of consciousness thought:
What are my thoughts at this moment? I see the pussy willows
on my bookcase ...a prehistoric vase ...spring, youth, old age
.. regrets ...the books ...the Encyclopedia of Ethics and Religion

CHAPTER

26

1. INTRODUCTION

... the book I did not finish ... My eyes wander to the door ... A photograph of Arthur Schnitzler on the wall ...my son Arthur ... his
future ...the lamp on the table ... What a patient had said about
the lamp once when it was without a shade ...the table ...it was
not there a few years ago ...my wife bought it ...I did not want
to spend the money at first ...she bought it nevertheless ... (pp.
28-29, ellipses in original)
Reik does not specify exactly how this report was generated; it was either a
“think-in-writing” protocol or a transcription of a think-aloud protocol recorded
on a dictaphone. He does make it fairly clear that retrospective elaboration and
modification (for the purposes of publication) were performed.
Rapaport (1951, p. 452) reports using the method of recording (presumably
by writing down) the contents of his hypnagogic reveries continuously, interrupted only by temporarily dozing off.

1.4.3

Thought Sampling and Event Recording

One variation on the immediate retrospective report is the method of thought
sampling used by Klinger (1978). In this method, subjects would carry a beeper
with them during the day. When the beeper sounded at a random time, subjects would be asked to describe or rate their most recent thoughts. Descriptions
would be provided in the form of a narrative retrospective report; subjects would

also complete a questionnaire in order to rate their most recent thoughts along
the following variables: duration of most recent thought segment, duration of
next to most recent thought segment, vagueness versus specificity of imagery,
amount of directed thought, amount of undirected thought, amount of detail in
imagery, number of things that seemed to be going on simultaneously, visualness
of imagery, auditoriness of imagery, attentiveness to environmental events, degree of recall of environmental events, degree to which imagery felt controllable,
degree of trust in accuracy of memory of latest experience, usualness of latest
experience, distortedness of latest experience, and time of life associated with
experience.
In the method of event recording discussed by Klinger, subjects are asked to

report whenever a particular kind of event occurs in the stream of consciousness. Thus, for example, subjects can be asked to note whenever they have a

daydream of revenge.
new daydreaming topic.

Pope (1978) used a button-press method to indicate a

1.5.

1.5

CONTENTS

OF THE BOOK

Contents

20

of the Book

The remainder of this book is organized as follows:
Chapters 2 through 7 present and discuss our computer model of human
daydreaming. The major contributions of each chapter are as follows:

[|
Artificial tatelligence | Algorithms
Paychology for modeling
Chapter 2

YD
Chapter 3

Chapter
Chapter
Chapter

Interaction of emotions

Daydreaming taxonomy
and strategies
4 | Strategies for learning
Memory for daydreams
Perpetual planning
Ee
Cee
5 | Serendipity-based planning | Algorithms for transfer
and learning
in problem solving
6 | Representation of
interpersonal planning
knowledge
7 | Detailed construction

me ee
Chapter

Chapter 8 presents a critical comparison of techniques for episode storage and
retrieval, including discrimination nets, spreading activation, and connectionist
nets.

Chapter 9 presents a comprehensive review of previous psychological work
on daydreaming and the related phenomenon of night dreaming.
Chapter 10 examines some of the underpinnings, both philosophical and
scientific, of the present work.
Chapter 11 presents some potential future applications of DAYDREAMER
and daydreaming, suggestions for future work, and conclusions.
Appendix A presents annotated traces of the operation of DAYDREAMER.
Appendix B presents the generator used to convert program representations
into English.

Teor rer
i
m Se
aw gnats hae

ere BTU:
aoa
a,
bye Ay Ffinn

Pe wiiuathy
etyal Chae ul
ee ae

oe

3a

re tianfai

So Oaria Waite

given a

=

Saniphhe

Mer pil
iors

Ebartid -ytinibemwk

it ths

~ Mochi.

aa

eu tipinena
pha li edn? Ui q
naan ee

a: ni

Lot) Sheet

a

ees

.

Lae aye

ny

“hae

pict

and

bane

Page ithe

ayrelieailey iq dnaemeraint

pT

eat

eran “tir Toigal

Srterih

WV

:,

pale
ee

oieewes

Ve

fe zi eee
toa

lacabyeitent Wyse

7

Sosy)
hie

bis++i 4“

ty

Obi

bi

'

Je1

}

ATPL

Bie' id rag 1)

miriol, iy

’

Viaibil

a

Gumi

(ialy

Wy

Se

4i))

1). 1) ' 494wt

i

i vka

ease w)e

Sat

vy ay HLatha a
Par:
!
x &“ld kImertg
lacey

'

ie

'

i“ ere

wee)
q

i]

1

ee

en
——,

ay

raph pfBRON,

=" y

nm

-

Td

r

i ni

i

i

#

i

A

hs

MO?

ae

"

ethilirtigge

its i

aa

epee” Sap ))

ma)

wir

set eer
wie
aren lio ir, lan v7 4) oe

<

,

ie”

Ae,

A

Pe O1 fs
CS

Se

CN,leoieritewie

‘rey ary |Say

Ba Hiy i "livncena YW j PAV)

-

ae|

ye

mdii« aM

ih Moldy
a

fae

raeayy

m

Suut!

:
aT

“ee

ucshentqos las
Peery

utero

wee,

Hite Wi
pili

bi

ahi

np

me

ni beiiot>see om oe) (patra a

*,

ies 1d eae x

hi

'

%

fp

mie

Chapter 2

Architecture of
DAYDREAMER
How do we build a daydreaming machine? What existing artificial intelligence
techniques can be employed? How must these techniques be extended? What
new techniques need to be developed?
This chapter presents the basic architecture of DAYDREAMER: We present
an overview of the program components, propose that daydreaming can be
modeled by the process of planning for multiple goals, introduce the mechanism
of emotion-driven planning, and present the control structure and procedures
of the program.

2.1

Overview of Program

DAYDREAMER

contains the following processing mechanisms:

e Emotion-driven

control

Analogical planner
e Serendipity mechanism

e Mutation mechanism
e Parser

e Generator
The program contains the following static data structures:
e Personal goals

29

CHAPTER 2. ARCHITECTURE

30

OF DAYDREAMER

e Daydreaming goals
e Planning rules
e Inference rules

The program contains the following dynamic data structures:
e Episodic memory
e Emotions

e Concerns
e Planning contexts

Personal goals are the basic goals of the program (such as to maintain selfesteem, form friendships, and so on). Daydreaming goals are an additional set
of goals which model human daydreaming activities and enable the program to
improve its ability to achieve its personal goals.
Concerns are processes or tasks on behalf of top-level goals. At any moment
a number of concerns are active—some are for personal goals, others are for
daydreaming goals. One or more emotions are associated with each concern.
The emotion-driven control mechanism determines which concern goal to work
on at any moment, based on these associated emotions.
The analogical planner employs planning and inference rules in order to generate plans for achieving a given top-level goal. It also generates plans through
the retrieval and analogical application of plans previously stored automatically
in episodic memory. (Some episodes are also added manually by the programmer.)
The analogical planner reads from and writes to planning contexts: A shortterm memory for the maintenance of alternative hypothetical worlds. When the
program is started, the first planning context is loaded with the initial state of
the external world.
The serendipity mechanism finds previously overlooked plans in response
to input states, retrieved episodes, and random possibilities generated by the
mutation mechanism.
English input is converted into representational data structures by the parser
and placed into the current planning context. Information added to the current planning context is converted into English and produced as output by the
generator. (While the recursive descent generator is able to produce a fairly
natural-sounding English sentence given any representation in the program’s
repertoire, the parser is implemented simply by mapping entire canned sentences into canned representations—parsing and generation of English is not a

major focus of this work.)

2.2.

DAYDREAMING

2.2

AS PLANNING

Daydreaming

31

as Planning

In daydreaming, one sometimes reviews existing, past world events.
Other
times, one constructs new, imaginary world events. That is, daydreaming is
generative (Jakobson, 1978; Chomsky, 1965).
In DAYDREAMER, the generation of imaginary sequences of events is accomplished through the process of planning’ (see, for example, Newell, Shaw,
& Simon, 1957; Fikes & Nilsson, 1971; Wilensky, 1983). Planning attempts
to achieve a top-level goal by breaking it into subgoals, breaking each of those
subgoals into further subgoals, and so on, until subgoals are reached that are
already satisfied or can be satisfied by performing an action. An action may in
turn require further subgoals (often called preconditions) to be achieved, which
may in turn require other actions to be performed.
In this section, we review past work in psychology and artificial intelligence
which attempts to find a suitable set of top-level goals for modeling humans.
We then present a set of such goals chosen for DAYDREAMER. Finally we
discuss how knowledge for achieving these goals is represented in the program
as planning and inference rules.

2.2.1

Previous

Personal

Goal

Sets

The objectives which a human strives to achieve or maintain—such as health,
shelter, safety, friendship, love, self-esteem, satisfaction of hunger, thirst, and
sexual needs, and so on—are called personal goals in DAYDREAMER. Personal
goals—in the past also variously known as “ends,” “aims,” “objectives,” “desires,” “needs,” “wishes,” “impulses,” “instincts,” and so on—are assumed to
be the basic determinants of human behavior.
Researchers have always grappled with the problem of finding a “fundamental” or “primitive” set of personal goals. Of developing one of his theories, S.

Freud (1920/1961) writes:
No knowledge would have been more valuable as a foundation for
true psychological science than an approximate grasp of the common
characteristics and possible distinctive features of the instincts. But
in no region of psychology were we groping more in the dark. Everyone assumed the existence of as many instincts or ‘basic instincts’
as he chose, and juggled with them like the ancient Greek natural
philosophers with their four elements—earth, air, fire, and water.

(p.45)
For example, McDougall (1923) proposed a set of instincts consisting of escape,
combat,

repulsion, appeal, mating,

curiosity, submission,

self-assertion, food-

1{talicized assertions regarding the processes and data entities of DAYDREAMER are to
be taken also as assertions of our theory of human daydreaming—that is, as hypotheses about
human daydreaming subject to empirical validation.

CHAPTER 2. ARCHITECTURE

32

OF DAYDREAMER

seeking, acquisition, construction, laughter, the gregarious instinct, and the
parental instinct.
Instead of postulating a large number of instincts, Freud chose merely to
classify instincts as sexual or ego instincts. Sexual instincts are concerned with
preservation of the species through reproduction, while ego instincts are concerned with self-preservation (including satisfaction of hunger, thirst, protection
from danger, and so on). Sexual instincts are governed by the “pleasure principle,” while ego instincts are governed by the “reality principle.”

Maslow (1954) argues that the endeavor of constructing lists of drives or
needs should be given up: such lists imply equality of the various drives, ignore
their dynamic nature, and treat drives as isolated entities, when in fact they
interact with each other. Moreover, he argues, the particular collection of drives
which one chooses depends on the degree of specificity of analysis. Maslow thus
proposes a hierarchy of needs, with lower-level needs having priority over higherlevel ones: At the lowest level are physiological needs such as sex, health, and
satisfaction of hunger and thirst. One level higher are safety needs such as those
for security, comfort, protection, and freedom from fear. Next, belongingness
and love are needs satisfied—for example, through friends, spouse, and family.
At the next level are esteem needs, divided into needs for self-respect and needs
for the esteem of others. At the highest level is the need for self-actualization, or
fulfillment of the true nature or potential of the particular individual in creative
or other activities.
Schank and Abelson (1977) propose a taxonomy of goals for use in story
comprehension; they are concerned with elaborating a set of goals which a
reader of a story assumes a character to have, when no explicit mention of goals
is made. In their scheme, goals are classified according to whether they are to be
repeatedly satisfied (S-HUNGER, S-SEX, S-SLEEP), are pursued for enjoyment
(E-TRAVEL, E-ENTERTAINMENT), are to be achieved (A-POSSESSIONS,

A-GOOD-JOB), are states to be preserved (P-HEALTH), or are instrumental
to other goals (D-KNOW, D-PROX).

2.2.2

A Set of Personal

Goals

The personal goal set of DAYDREAMER roughly approximates the personal
goals of humans; however, several common human goals (such as safety, shelter,
sleep, oxygen, and water) are omitted for simplicity. The following personal
goals correspond to (physical or mental) states to be achieved and maintained;
they are called achievement goals:

SELF-ESTEEM

Achieve and maintain a positive self attitude

SOCIAL ESTEEM
son toward self

LOVERS

Achieve and maintain a positive attitude of another per-

Achieve and maintain a romantic relationship with another person

_ 2.2.

DAYDREAMING

FRIENDS

AS PLANNING

33

Achieve and maintain a friendship with another person

EMPLOYMENT

Achieve and maintain employment

The following personal goals require repeated satisfaction; they are called cyclic
goals:

FOOD
SEX

Satisfy a recurring need for food
Satisfy a recurring need for sexual gratification

LOVE-GIVING

Satisfy a recurring need for giving love

LOVE-RECEIVING

Satisfy a recurring need for receiving love

COMPANIONSHIP

Satisfy a recurring need for companionship

ENTERTAINMENT

Satisfy a recurring need for entertainment

MONEY

Satisfy a recurring need for money

POSSESSIONS

Satisfy a recurring need for more possessions

Cyclic goals correspond to need states whose level of satisfaction is continually declining. Once the level of satisfaction of a need state falls below a certain
level, a personal goal to satisfy that need state is activated. Performing an
appropriate action then restores the level of satisfaction of that need state to a
certain level. For example, when the level of satisfaction of the need for food
falls below a certain level (i.e., one becomes hungry), one eats. This restores
the level of satisfaction of the need for food to a high level. With the passage
of time, the level again falls below a certain level, one eats again, and so on.
Personal goals are not isolated entities; rather, they interact dynamically
in various ways: The satisfaction of one personal goal may continually enable the satisfaction of another personal goal (directly or indirectly); this situation is called goal subsumption (Schank & Abelson, 1977). For exaimple,
- as long as one continues to have a job, the need for money will continue
to be satisfied; thus EMPLOYMENT subsumes MONEY. In a similar fash-

ion, LOVERS subsumes SEX, LOVE-GIVING, LOVE-RECEIVING, COMPANIONSHIP,

and

ENTERTAINMENT;

FRIENDS

subsumes

COMPANIONSHIP

and ENTERTAINMENT; MONEY subsumes POSSESSIONS and ENTERTAINMENT. All achievement and cyclic goals enable satisfaction, to some extent, of
SELF-ESTEEM

and SOCIAL

ESTEEM.

When a need state falls below a certain level of satisfaction, DAYDREAMER
takes a different action depending on whether its corresponding subsumption
state is satisfied: As shown in Figure 2.1, if the subsumption state is not satisfied,
a goal to achieve that subsumption state is initiated. Otherwise, a goal to
achieve the need itself is initiated. So, for example, if one does not have a job
and runs low on money, one initiates the goal to get a job. If one has a job and

34

CHAPTER 2. ARCHITECTURE

OF DAYDREAMER

Need state
below threshold

Initiate

Subsumption
state achieved?

[ves

No

goal

p to achieve
subsumption

state

Initiate goal
to satisfy
need state

Figure 2.1: Needs with Subsumption States
runs low on money, one initiates the goal to go to work. Running low on money
is therefore what drives the program to maintain employment.
It might be argued that the goal set presented here is incorrect (e.g., is the
goal for money really a basic goal?), or incomplete (e.g., it omits the goal to
acquire information through reading). But it must be realized that any goal set
in an artificial intelligence program is arbitrary—it is always relative to what the
function of the program is. Nor is it possible to specify a final set of human goals
from which all other goals follow, given our unique ability to create idiosyncratic

goals. As Lewin (1926/1951) put it: “The extraordinary liberty which man has
to intend any, even nonsensical actions—that is, his freedom to create in himself
quasi-needs—is amazing” (p. 136). Schank and Abelson (1977) also note:
If one were to set out to list all the different kinds of things that
could be desired, there would be no end to it. One may be told and
be prepared to believe that someone likes banging his head or wants
to line his patio with Martian rocks. ...(p. 112)

2.2.3

Planning and Inference Rules

In order to achieve personal goals, DAYDREAMER contains knowledge about
persons, physical objects, locations, possession of physical objects, locations
of objects, environmental conditions, personal attributes (such as occupation,
external appearance, social class), mental states (such as beliefs, goals, attitudes, emotions), interpersonal relationships (such as friends, lovers, employeeemployer), actions (such as changing location, communicating information, eating), and activities (such as seeing a movie, eating at a restaurant, going on a
date). We refer to this realm of world entities generally as the interpersonal
domain.
Representation of the interpersonal domain in DAYDREAMER is based on

2.2.

DAYDREAMING

AS PLANNING

35

previous work by Dyer (1983a) and Schank and Abelson (1977) on representing

relationships and stereotypical sequences of events in the everyday world, and
Heider (1958) on representing sentiments or generalized attitudes and how they
relate to interpersonal relations. Our contribution is the addition of planning
knowledge for forming, maintaining, and terminating relationships, scripts for
asking someone out, going out on a date, and so on.
Domain knowledge is represented in the program as rules. There are two
kinds of rules—planning rules and inference rules. Planning rules specify alternative methods for breaking down a goal into subgoals, while inference rules
specify unavoidable consequences of various states or events.
A rule consists of an antecedent pattern (indicated by IF) and a consequent
pattern (indicated by THEN). Here are two sample rules from DAYDREAMER:

THEN

IF

person has POS-ATTITUDE toward something
that self has POS-ATTITUDE toward

THEN

POS-ATTITUDE

toward person

ACTIVE-GOAL to have POS-ATTITUDE toward person
ACTIVE-GOAL for person to have POS-ATTITUDE
toward something that self has POS-ATTITUDE
toward

The first rule is an inference rule which states that if one likes something
that one believes another person likes, one will like that person. The second
rule is a planning rule which states that if one has a goal to like someone, the
subgoal may be created for one to like something that one believes the other
person likes. Rules often occur in complementary pairs such as this. In fact,
such pairs are represented in DAYDREAMER as a single combined planning and
inference rule. Hereafter, combined planning and inference rules will only be
given in their planning form.
Rules are applied through unification (Charniak, Riesbeck, & McDermott,
1980; Robinson, 1965) and instantiation: If the antecedent pattern of a rule
unifies with an existing representational data structure, a new representational
- data structure is constructed by instantiating the consequent pattern of the rule
with the variable bindings resulting from the unification.
If several planning rules unify with a given subgoal, each rule is applied in
its own separate world model or planning context. Thus, planning rules give
rise to alternative states of a hypothetical world.
Although the above rules are stated in terms of “self,” they may be applied
to other entities than DAYDREAMER via other planning. Using this mechanism,
DAYDREAMER is able to represent the mental states of others, make inferences

about the mental states of others (simulate the viewpoint of others), and perform
planning in order to influence the mental states of others.
In addition to the contribution of other daydreaming mechanisms, the fanciful scenarios characteristic of daydreaming result in part from the use of plausible
planning and inference rules—rules whose applicability in the real world is less

CHAPTER 2. ARCHITECTURE

36

Daydream1
Concern

Daydream2
Concern2

OF DAYDREAMER

Daydream3
Concern

... thought! thought2 thought3 thought4 thought5 thought6 thought7 thought8 ...
time

Figure 2.2: Interleaving of Concerns

than certain. For example, DAYDREAMER has the plausible inference rule that
if someone smiles at her, that person is romantically interested in her. This can
lead to a fanciful daydream about a relationship in response to a mere friendly
smile.
The particular rules employed by DAYDREAMER in generating daydreams
in the interpersonal domain are discussed in Chapter 6.

2.3

Daydreaming as Multiple Goal Planning

Most artificial intelligence programs (a) take a request from a human user, (b)
handle the request, and (c) terminate:

For example, a medical expert system

such as MYCIN (Shortliffe, 1976) is asked to recommend a course of treatment
given a description of symptoms, or a natural language understanding system
such as BORIS (Dyer, 1983a) is asked to read and answer questions about a
given segment of text.
In contrast, DAYDREAMER has a collection of goals which are initiated and
processed as the program sees fit. Instead of terminating once a goal is achieved,
DAYDREAMER switches to another one of its goals.
Daydream protocols may be divided into segments which relate to a particular “current concern,” or goal not yet achieved, of the daydreamer (Klinger,

1971). Therefore, in DAYDREAMER, a task or activity on behalf of an active
top-level goal is called a concern.
At any time, several concerns may be active. The program operates by selecting a concern and performing some planning for that concern, then selecting
another concern and performing some planning for that concern, and so on repeatedly. Planning activity results in the production of representational data
structures; these are the “thoughts” of the program which are converted into
English and produced as output. In DAYDREAMER, then, daydreaming consists
of the production of a sequence of representations through a process of planning
which shifts from concern to concern. Each subsequence of contiguous representations produced on behalf of a given concern may be called a “daydream” (see

Figure 2.2).

2.4.

DAYDREAMING

AS EMOTION-DRIVEN PLANNING

37

GOAL1
PROBLEM
SOLVER

GOAL2

Create
subgoal/
metagoal

GOAL3

Figure 2.3: Meta-Planning/Universal Subgoaling

2.4

Daydreaming as Emotion-Driven Planning

How does the program decide which of its concerns to process at any given
moment, and which others to defer? Some overall guiding mechanism is needed
to direct attention to the concern deemed most important at any moment in
time.
Wilensky (1983) proposed the mechanism of meta-planning and the use of
meta-themes such as DON’T WASTE RESOURCES for dealing with multiple goals. Laird (1984) proposed the use of a goal selection subgoal within
the framework of universal subgoaling. In both cases, general problem solving
is invoked in order to cope with multiple goals: as shown in Figure 2.3, a tie or
conflict between two goals is resolved by initiating a third goal. |
These approaches suffer from two problems: First, in practice, there is often
no time to invoke general meta-planning or subgoaling when making behavioral
decisions in an external environment. Rather, a computationally inexpensive
set of heuristics is required. Second, from a psychological standpoint, thoughts
about “what to think about next” are relatively infrequent in the protocols of
human daydreaming we have examined—whereas meta-planning and universal
subgoaling could very well end up in a deep recursion in determining what to
do next.

As an alternative, we propose the mechanism of emotion-driven planning
in which emotions provide the primary motivation for daydreaming: First, in
order to daydream at all, emotions must be present. Second, emotions determine

CHAPTER 2. ARCHITECTURE

38

OF DAYDREAMER

EMOTIONS 1

EMOTION-DRIVEN
CONTROL

:
EMOTIONS2

Figure 2.4: Emotion-Driven Planning

which concern to process at any particular time.” 3
One or more emotions are associated with each concern, as shown in Figure 2.4. The emotional motivation of a concern (also called its dynamic importance) is the absolute value of the sum of the strengths of each of the emotions
associated with that concern. The primary control algorithm of DAYDREAMER
is then as follows:
1. Select concern with highest emotional motivation.

2. Perform one unit of planning for that concern.
3. Go to step 1.
While a concern is the most highly motivated, planning activity proceeds
towards this concern. If at some point another concern becomes more highly
motivated, then planning activity switches to this other concern. That is, a shift
from one concern to another occurs when the motivation of the latter is greater
than the motivation of the former. The processing of concerns depends upon
the association of emotions with concerns and the setting and modification of
the strengths of those emotions.
It should be noted that meta-planning handles problems which emotion-driven planning
is not designed

to handle:

For example,

suppose

the program

has concerns

to maintain

a

friendship with Karen, satisfy a need for food, and rationalize being turned down for a job.
Meta-planning would enable the generation of a plan in which the daydreamer has dinner with
Karen in order to achieve two of her concerns (satisfy need for food and maintain friendship)
simultaneously. If Karen also happens to be good at coming up with rationalizations for
failures, the three concerns of the daydreamer could be achieved in a single plan. Achievement

of multiple concerns can only occur accidentally in DAYDREAMER (through serendipity and
fortuitous subgoal success). A complete system would have to have both meta-planning for
long-term planning, and emotion-driven planning for short-term decisions about what to do
next and what to daydream about next.

’The view that emotions serve as motivation in humans will be argued in Chapter 3.

2.4.

DAYDREAMING

AS EMOTION-DRIVEN PLANNING

39

In DAYDREAMER, emotions are activated, deactivated, associated with concerns, and disassociated with concerns in various situations:
When a concern is initiated, a new emotion is created and associated with the
concern. The strength of the emotion is set according to the intrinsic importance
(a measure of importance assigned by the programmer) of the goal. For example,
in DAYDREAMER the friendship goal has a greater intrinsic importance than
the entertainment goal. Thus, all other things being equal, the program will
pursue a friendship goal before attending to an entertainment goal.
Our notion of intrinsic importance is similar to the notion of relative goal
importance Carbonell (1980) developed for modeling personality traits and political ideologies. The emotion representation created upon concern initiation is
intended to model the emotion of “interest-excitement” which is hypothesized
to provide a source of motivation in humans (Tomkins, 1962; Izard, 1977). This
emotion accompanies a motivated task and is sustained through successful per-

formance of this task.

Rothenberg (1979) is most likely referring to the same

emotion when he writes:

“While engaging in the creative process, the creator is

stimulated and aroused” (p. 46).
When a concern terminates (with a success or failure), a new positive or
negative response emotion is created. The strength of this new emotion is set
according to the dynamic importance of the concern—that is, the absolute value
of the sum of the strengths of the emotions associated with the concern. Such
negative-response emotions may initiate and become associated with new concerns. Any motivating emotions associated with the concern not connected to
other concerns are deactivated.
The strengths of response emotions decay over time and such emotions are
disassociated with any concerns and deactivated when their strength falls below
a certain threshold. A concern whose motivation falls below a certain threshold
is terminated.
When a real or imagined personal goal success or failure occurs as a side
effect of processing to achieve some concern, a response emotion ts created and
associated with that concern. Its strength is proportional to the intrinsic importance of the goal. This provides an additional force of motivation for a concern
when unexpected personal goal successes are generated, and a reduction in motivation when unexpected goal failures are generated.
When a subgoal of a concern succeeds while working on another concern,
or when a potential plan for achieving the top-level goal of some concern ts
accidentally discovered by the serendipity mechanism, a new positive emotion
is created and associated with the concern. Its strength is some fraction of the
strength of the motivating emotions of the concern.
Here is an example which will serve to clarify the interaction between emotions and concerns: Suppose two concerns—concern, and concern2—are initiated. Motivating emotions are created and associated with the two concerns
as shown in Figure 2.5. Their strengths are equal to the intrinsic importances
of the concerns; in this case, concern, has a greater intrinsic importance than

CHAPTER 2. ARCHITECTURE

40

0.9

0.

:

0.9

OF DAYDREAMER

:

0.8

Figure 2.6: Emotions and Concerns 2

concerng and so its emotion has a greater strength.
be processed first.

Therefore, concern, will

Now suppose that a side-effect personal goal success occurs while processing concern,. A new emotion is created and associated with that concern, as
shown in Figure 2.6. The strength of the new emotion is proportional to the
intrinsic importance of the personal goal which succeeded. Concern; now has
two emotions connected to it; its dynamic importance is now even more than it
was before. Therefore, concern, will again be processed rather than concern.

While processing concern,, suppose an accidental success of a subgoal of
concern occurs. This creates a positive emotion (corresponding to the feeling
of surprise in humans) which is associated with concern, as shown in Figure 2.7. The strength of this emotion is such that the dynamic importance of
concernz has now surpassed that of concern,. For the first time, concerng will
be processed instead of concern,.
Now suppose that concern terminates with a failure. A negative response
emotion is created; its strength is equal to the dynamic importance of the concern before it terminated. This new emotion in turn activates a new concern,

2.4.

DAYDREAMING

AS EMOTION-DRIVEN PLANNING

4]

Figure 2.7: Emotions and Concerns 3

as shown in Figure 2.8. Since the dynamic importance of concern3 is greater
than that of concerny, it will be processed.
Next suppose a new concern is initiated and an associated emotion activated,
as shown in Figure 2.9. The dynamic importance of this new concern, (which so
far is equal to its intrinsic importance) is greater than the dynamic importance
of both concern3 and concern, so it will be processed.
Figure 2.10 summarizes this example: concerns were processed in the follow-

ing sequence:

concern,

concerny, concerne, concerns, concern4.

Of course,

in an actual DAYDREAMER run, many steps are performed for each concern
before an event occurs causing the program to switch to another concern. Decay
of emotion strengths has also been ignored in this example.

1.4

1.4

Figure 2.8: Emotions and Concerns 4

CHAPTER 2. ARCHITECTURE

42

OF DAYDREAMER

ae)

:

)

Figure 2.9: Emotions and Concerns 5

concem4

concem3

concem1

‘e)

2 6-5

©
dynamic
importance

Ya

concem2

time

Figure 2.10: Emotions and Concerns

2.5.

PROCEDURES FOR DAYDREAMING

43

The primary control mechanism of DAYDREAMER is similar to the AM
(Lenat, 1976) agenda mechanism, except that whereas AM tasks are assigned
a resource limit after which processing switches to another task, in DAYDREAMER execution of a concern continues until it is interrupted by a higher
priority concern (for example, as a result of the activation of a new top-level
goal or upon detection of a serendipity). Another difference is that within a
DAYDREAMER concern, certain heuristics are used to direct the search process
within that concern. Thus DAYDREAMER has agendas within agendas.
The idea of multiple concerns motivated by emotions in DAYDREAMER is
related to Minsky’s (1977) computational theory of the mind as a society of
intercommunicating and conflicting entities. He describes a child playing with
blocks: Internally, the WRECKER in the child wants to destroy the tower
being built by the BUILDER. Meanwhile, the 1M-GETTING-HUNGRY entity
is growing in strength. As the control of the BUILDER weakens, the child
destroys the tower and gets up to go home and eat.
Emotional motivations associated with concerns in DAYDREAMER are similar in some ways to priorities associated with processes in a computer operating
system (see, for example, Thompson, 1978, pp. 1936-1937). However, operating
systems rapidly interleave tasks, giving more time to higher-priority processes
and less time to lower-priority processes. Humans do not process concerns in
a “round-robin” fashion because of the overhead required for bringing a new
concern into short-term memory (J. R. Anderson, 1983). Humans tend to stay
with one concern until interrupted for a particular reason by another, as does
DAYDREAMER.

2.5

Procedures for Daydreaming

DAYDREAMER consists of a number of procedures, shown in Figure 2.11. This
section presents the procedures and explains the gist of what they do. Further
details and examples will be presented later on.
These procedures make use of the following existing techniques in artificial
- intelligence:
e planning (Fikes & Nilsson, 1971),
e planning for multiple goals (Wilensky, 1983),
e analogical planning (Carbonell, 1983; Fikes, P. E. Hart, & Nilsson, 1972),
and

e episodic memory (Kolodner, 1984; Schank, 1982).
The novel aspects of these procedures are the following:
e Emotion-driven planning: a mechanism based on emotions for determining
which goal to focus on at any moment in planning.

CHAPTER 2. ARCHITECTURE

44

OF DAYDREAMER

Emotion-driven control
!
Planner.

Rule application

Inference rule application

Concern initiation

Concern termination

Planning rule application

Episode retrieval

(Input) —————#

Serendipity recognition

Jenn Subgoal creation

Reminding

<4——

Episode storage

Analogical rule application

Mutation

Figure 2.11: DAYDREAMER

Procedures

e Serendipity-based planning/learning: a mechanism for finding previously
overlooked plans in response to input states, recalled episodes, and generated mutations of events.
Once an overlooked plan has been found
through serendipity, it is stored in memory, so the program does not have
to stumble upon the same solution in the future.

e Integration: The various techniques, old and new, have been integrated
into a complete system.

e Application to daydreaming: The techniques are applied to the problem
of modeling human daydreaming.
Emotion-driven control is the top-level procedure of the program. It consists
of the following steps:
1. Invoke inference rule application to initiate concerns.

2. Select the concern with the highest dynamic importance.
3. Invoke planner on that concern.
4. Go to step 2.

It is intended for the program to continue to daydream for as long as it is turned
on. Thus the above procedure consists of an endless processing loop.
The planner procedure is as follows:
1. Invoke rule application.

2. If top-level goal succeeded, invoke concern termination with “success.”

2.5.

PROCEDURES FOR DAYDREAMING

45

3. Otherwise, if no subgoals were created in step 1:

(a) Attempt to backtrack.
(b) If all possibilities have been exhausted, invoke concern termination
with “failure.”

Once a single plan has been generated for achieving a top-level goal, the concern
terminates successfully. A concern terminates unsuccessfully when all planning
routes have failed.
Rule application is as follows:
1. For each active subgoal whose subgoals have all succeeded or whose objective is satisfied:

(a) If subgoal is for another concern, create a positive emotion and associate it with the other concern.

(b) If objective of subgoal is an action, assert it.
(c) Change subgoal from active to succeeded.
2. Invoke inference rule application.
3. Invoke planning rule application.

A subgoal succeeds when all of its subgoals have succeeded.
subgoal can succeed:

In addition, a

e as a result of an input state or action, or

e as a side effect of planning for another subgoal.
This other subgoal can be on behalf of the current concern or another concern
entirely. In the latter case, a positive emotion is generated and associated with
- the other concern, making it more likely for that concern to be processed in the
future.
Concern

termination is as follows:

1. Destroy otherwise unconnected emotions associated with concern.
2. Create a new positive or negative response emotion, whose strength is
equal to the dynamic importance of the top-level goal.

3. If concern terminated with “success,” invoke episode storage on the generated plan.
4. Destroy concern.

CHAPTER 2. ARCHITECTURE

46

OF DAYDREAMER

A positive emotion is created upon success, and a negative emotion is created
upon failure.
Episode storage stores a plan in episodic memory indexed under the top-level
goal, subgoals, and surface-level features (including persons, physical objects,

and locations).
Inference rule application is as follows:

1. For each applicable inference rule:

(a) Assert the consequent of the rule.
(b) If consequent is a personal goal success or failure, generate an emotional response and associate it with the current concern.

(c) If consequent is a new goal, invoke concern initiation.
Note that inference rule application is what initiates concerns in the first place.
In general, concerns are initiated when a need state (such as for money) in the
program is unsatisfied.
Concern initiation is as follows:
1.

Create

a new

concern.

2. If an emotion was an antecedent of the inference rule which resulted in
the creation of this concern, associate that emotion with the concern.

3. Otherwise, create a new motivating emotion and associate it with this
concern. The strength of the new emotion is proportional to the intrinsic
importance of the personal goal.

From step 2 above, one can see that a new concern resulting from the success
or failure of an old concern assumes a dynamic importance equal to that of the
old concern.
Planning rule application is as follows:

1. For each active subgoal of the current concern having no subgoals:
(a) Invoke episode retrieval using subgoal objective and other active indices.

(b) If episode retrieved, invoke reminding and analogical rule application
procedures.

(c) Otherwise, for each accessible planning rule which is applicable to
subgoal, in a new context, create subgoals as specified by the rule.
Episode retrieval retrieves a planning experience from memory given a set
of indices. An experience is retrieved only if a certain number of its indices are
provided.

2.5.

PROCEDURES FOR DAYDREAMING

47

The reminding procedure is as follows:

1. Activate other indices of the retrieved episode E (limiting the number of
active indices).
2. Invoke episode retrieval on the active indices.

3. If another episode E’ is retrieved, invoke reminding procedure recursively

on E’.
4. Invoke serendipity recognition on E.
This procedure can produce an associative stream of recalled experiences.
Analogical rule application uses a retrieved plan to suggest which rule to
apply to the current subgoal, its resulting subgoals, and so on. This procedure
reduces search in planning. If a suggested rule does not apply in the current
situation, the program reverts to trying all accessible, applicable rules.
Serendipity recognition is as follows:
1. Perform an intersection search through the space of planning rule connections from the current top-level goal to a salient concept.

2. If a path is found:

(a) Create a positive emotion and associate it with the current concern.
(b) Verify the potential plan given by the path through recursive invocation of the planner.

The intersection search through rule connections is a way of discovering that a
salient concept is related to the current top-level goal—in particular, that the
concept is of potential use in achieving the goal. The salient concept can be:
e a concept provided as input to DAYDREAMER
e certain previously inaccessible rules contained in episodes that have just
been retrieved

e aconcept generated by mutation

As in the case of a fortuitous subgoal success, the generated positive emotion
makes it more likely that the concern will be processed over other concerns in
the future.
The idea underlying the serendipity mechanism is as follows: All of the rules
in the program applicable to a given goal may not be accessible when attempting
to achieve that goal. Some rules may have been improperly or incompletely
indexed when they were first acquired. However, when a rule is brought into
focus, the system should check whether that rule is applicable to any currently
active goal and, if so, immediately apply that rule to that goal. This is exactly
what the serendipity mechanism does.

48

CHAPTER 2. ARCHITECTURE

OF DAYDREAMER

Mutation is as follows:

1. For each unsatisfied subgoal whose objective is an action, for each mutation of the action generated by permuting objects, generalizing objects, or
changing the action type, invoke serendipity recognition.
Mutation is invoked in DAYDREAMER as a last resort when all plans for achieving a goal have failed.
In the chapters to come, the above mechanisms will be fleshed out and the
particular knowledge structures operated upon by these mechanisms will be
presented and discussed.

Chapter 3

Emotions

and

Daydreaming
In 1890, William James proposed that emotions are the awareness of the bodily
changes resulting from the perception of some fact. According to James, “we
feel sorry because we cry” and “angry because we strike” (p. 450). Based

on evidence from experiments conducted on animals, Cannon (1927) criticized
this theory on the grounds, among others, that the perception of the bodily
states in question is too vague to account for the variety and detail of human

emotions. Schachter and J. E. Singer (1962) demonstrated experimentally that
physiologically similar states induced by injecting epinephrine into a human
subject could be experienced as either positive and negative emotional states
depending on the cognitive appraisal of the situation by the subject.
Recent work in the computer modeling of emotions

(Colby, 1975; Pfeifer,

1982; Dyer, 1983b) follows Schachter and J. E. Singer (1962) in assuming that
emotional states can be described in cognitive terms. However, this work addresses only emotions resulting from real-world events.
In this chapter, we extend previous work by addressing how emotions are
influenced by daydreaming, and how daydreaming is influenced by emotions.
First, we address emotional responses to daydreamed events. Second, we discuss
the representation of emotions. Third, we introduce a set of daydreaming goals
or strategies for daydreaming. Fourth, we discuss the daydreaming goals of
rationalization, revenge, and roving which are activated in response to emotions
and which serve a useful emotion regulation function. Fifth, we speculate on how
highly idiosyncratic emotional states might be represented in humans. Sixth,
we review previous related work.

49

CHAPTER 3. EMOTIONS AND DAYDREAMING

50

3.1

Emotional Responses in Daydreaming

Emotions relate to goal outcomes (Dyer, 1983b; Weiner, 1982; Abelson, 1981):
generally speaking, a goal success results in a positive emotion while a goal
failure results in a negative emotion. Is this also true of goal successes and
failures that are imagined during daydreaming? That is, can one become so
involved in a daydream that one experiences an emotional reaction to an event
which has not even happened in the real world?
Retrospective reports of daydreaming—including narrative reports (McNeil,

1981) and responses to items of the Imaginal Processes Inventory (J. L. Singer
& Antrobus, 1963)—indicate that positive and negative emotional responses in
fact do occur in daydreaming. Beck (1967) reports a patient who “experienced
intense humiliation as though the fantasied event was occurring in reality.” (p.

329)
Although emotions are often produced in daydreaming (J. L. Singer, 1978;
Pope & J. L. Singer, 1978a; Varendonck, 1921), imagined goal successes and
failures do not always have the same emotional consequences as real ones. For
example, an imagined goal success can result in a negative, rather than positive,
emotion under certain circumstances. In the examples which follow, we explore
the additional complexity of emotional responses in daydreaming.
First of all, it is possible to experience a real goal failure or success during
daydreaming by making new inferences or through reinterpretation of a past
experience:
I realize that the professor actually told us that the passing grade
on the psychology midterm was 50, not 60, so I actually passed the
test!

I realize that I left my car in a Tuesday morning street cleaning zone,
and so there is a parking ticket waiting for me.

There is nothing new here: A goal success in the first example results in a
positive emotion and a goal failure in the second results in a negative emotion.
The emotional reactions to a goal outcome detected during daydreaming are the
same as those resulting from a goal outcome in a real-world experience. One
might object that if the goal outcome no longer matters to the daydreamer,
because, for example, the reinterpreted experience happened so long ago, or
a more recent goal outcome has superseded the old one, then the emotional
response may not occur, or may occur with reduced strength. But then this is
no longer considered a real goal outcome.
What about imagined goal outcomes? Consider the following:
I imagine that I get the top grade on my upcoming midterm.
I imagine that the problems on my upcoming psychology midterm
are so difficult that I have no idea how to answer them. I fail the
test.

3.1.

EMOTIONAL

RESPONSES IN DAYDREAMING

51

In the first example, one might feel pleasure or hope, while in the second, one
might feel displeasure or worry.
Thus far, successes have corresponded to positive emotions while failures
have corresponded to negative emotions, as one might normally expect. However, consider the following example:
I wish that I had done the sample questions at the end of the chapter.
Then I would have known how to do the second question on the test
and I would have passed.
In this case, passing the test, which is normally considered a goal success, results in a negative emotion. This is because it results from-an alternative past
action which was not performed. The word regret is often used for the negative
emotion in such situations. Similarly, an imagined goal failure resulting from
an alternative which was not performed results in a positive emotion:

I imagine cheating on the test my copying my neighbor’s answers.
But I would probably have gotten caught.

Here one would be glad about not having cheated: Imagining that one would
have gotten caught, normally a goal failure, here results in a positive emotion
often called relief. Thus, the sign (negative or positive) of the emotion resulting from an imagined goal outcome is negated if that outcome results from an
alternative past.
How strong are the emotions resulting from an imagined situation? Is the
strength of the emotion the same (possibly with opposite sign) as for a real
goal? The strength of the emotion is certainly proportional to the importance

of the goal (Dyer, 1983b). For example:
I imagine that if I didn’t fail my psychology midterm, I wouldn’t
have had to eat lunch an hour late in order to talk to the professor.
Here, eating lunch on time is not a particularly important goal, and so the
resulting negative emotion is not particularly strong.
Now consider the following:

I imagine that I actually had all the knowledge of the psychology
professor. Then I would have aced the exam.

In this case, acing the exam does not result in a very negative emotion. This
is because the scenario is unrealistic. As a result, we see that the strength
of the emotion is in proportion to the realism of the scenario as well as the
importance of the goal. Some experimental evidence for such an effect is provided
by Kahneman and Tversky (1982) who presented subjects with two scenarios:
missing a plane which had just departed because it was delayed, and missing a
plane which had departed on time long ago. To 96 percent of the subjects, the
former was rated as a more upsetting scenario than the latter. In our terms,

52

CHAPTER 3. EMOTIONS AND DAYDREAMING

it is more realistic to have caught the plane in the former scenario than in the
latter.
The following situations have now been examined: real goal outcomes, imagined future goal outcomes, and imagined goal outcomes resulting from alternative pasts. We have seen that in the case of alternative pasts, the sign of
emotions is negated. We have also seen that the strength of emotions is proportional to the realism of the scenario and the importance of the goal. We
therefore hypothesize the following emotional response rule for daydreaming:
For a goal outcome g with realism r, the strength of the resulting
emotion is proportional to r -importance(g) and the sign of the resulting emotion is the same as that of g unless the scenario represents
an alternative past in which case the sign of the resulting emotion
is opposite to that of g.

Psychological experiments are needed in order to test the above rule: One
approach would be to compare subjective ratings provided by subjects for scenario realism and goal importance with those for emotion strength. However,
there are several potential difficulties: How do we elicit the necessary daydreams
in subjects? If stories are used in lieu of daydreams, how do we know that similar
emotional responses occur in natural daydreaming?
The above rule requires that DAYDREAMER have the capabilities of:
e maintaining whether or not a given scenario is an alternative version of
the past
e assigning importance to goals

e assessing the realism of a scenario
The first capability is easily added to the program: Whenever a scenario takes
a past situation as its starting point, it is marked as an alternative past scenario. The goal importance is determined according to the dynamic importance

of a goal; this in turn is based upon (a) its intrinsic importance set upon goal
activation, and (b) modifications to the importance performed during later daydreaming. Scenario realism is assessed based upon the plausibilities (Shortliffe
& Buchanan, 1975; Duda, P. E. Hart, & Nilsson, 1976) of the rules employed in
generating a given scenario.
DAYDREAMER maintains a running assessment of the realism of a given scenario. However, a human may defer evaluation of the realism of a daydream—or
may never evaluate its realism. In certain hallucinatory daydreaming states, one
may believe that the events of the daydream are actually happening. Foulkes
and Fleisher (1975) report that a surprising 19 percent of the subjects interrupted while in a state of relaxed wakefulness described their thoughts as hallucinatory. If a person has a hallucinatory daydream, that is, if a person fails to
make assessments about the realism of a scenario and whether the daydream is

3.2.

EMOTION REPRESENTATION

53

an alternative past scenario, emotional responses will be calculated according to
default assessments that the scenario is realistic and not an alternative. Therefore, the strength of the emotion will be greater without a realism judgment
and the sign of the emotion will be inverted if the scenario is not assessed as an
alternative version of the past. Thus, for example, after barely avoiding a severe car accident, one may first experience pangs from imagining what it would
have been like had the accident occurred, and then feel relief after realizing
that the accident only occurred in an alternative version of the past. In general, the emotional response to a situation depends on the cognitive appraisal
of that situation (Schachter & J. E. Singer, 1962; Mandler, 1975). For example,
as the causal attributions for a failure or success change over time, so do the
corresponding emotions (Weiner, 1980b, p. 369).
Under what conditions does one make or fail to make such assessments in
daydreaming? Additional research is needed in this area. It is possible that
failure to make realism and alternative assessments is the default in certain
daydreaming states, with such assessments being produced only if required to
reduce a sufficiently strong negative emotion resulting from a daydream without such assessments. For simplicity, the current version of DAYDREAMER
continually maintains such assessments.

3.2

Emotion

Representation

The representation of emotions in DAYDREAMER is based on Dyer’s (1983b)
previous representation of emotions for use in narrative comprehension. We
extend his previous work, addressing the problems of: (a) how daydreaming influences emotions, and (b) how emotions influence daydreaming and behavior.
Emotions are represented in DAYDREAMER in terms of the following components:

e Sign: positive or negative.
e Strength: non-negative real number specifying the magnitude of the emotion.

To (optional): person toward whom the emotion is directed (as in anger).

From goal (optional):

failed or succeeded goal from which the emotion

resulted as a response.

To goal (optional): active goal for which the emotion serves as motivation.
Altern: flag specifying whether or not the emotion resulted from an imagined alternative past scenario.
In the case of the to goal, the emotion may have either caused the activation
of the goal (as in the case of daydreaming goals), or may have been activated

CHAPTER 3. EMOTIONS AND DAYDREAMING

54

Table 3.1: Positive Emotions in DAYDREAMER

From goal
P [no | ____— Talled goal
ipiaat
dshreete
hailed SELF-ESTEEM |
ladweer | noUSSoon |__|
ioeiaailaiaipeaialal|
rejection
aeno
heartbreak peeee ean ee TT
Ec ees ee
EO
Te ee
P| Tailed goal
|
__ [hailed SOCTAT. ESTEEM
Toward

embarrassment

no

Table 3.2: Negative Emotions in DAYDREAMER

simultaneously with the goal. Various terms for emotions in English may be
represented using the above scheme, as shown in Table 3.1 (positive emotions)
and Table 3.2 (negative emotions). (The active goal may not be a daydreaming
goal in the case of interest.)
Two terms are used to refer broadly to positive and negative emotions:
e Pleasure, also called satisfaction, joy, happiness,
positive emotion.

and so on refers to a

e Displeasure, also called dissatisfaction, unhappiness, disappointment, sadness, and so on, refers to a negative emotion.

Two terms refer to goal resolutions in imagined alternative past scenarios:

e Relief refers to any positive emotion resulting from an imagined past goal
failure.

3.2.

EMOTION REPRESENTATION

55

Regret refers to any negative emotion resulting from an imagined past goal
success.

Several terms refer to the specific kind of goal which resulted in the emotion:
Amusement refers to a positive emotion resulting from a succeeded EN-

TERTAINMENT goal.

Satiation refers to a succeeded FOOD goal.
Pride refers to a succeeded SELF-ESTEEM

goal.

Poise refers to a succeeded SOCIAL ESTEEM

goal.

Shame refers to a negative emotion resulting from a failed SELF-ESTEEM
goal.
Embarrassment refers to a failed SOCIAL ESTEEM

goal.

Rejection refers to a failed goal for a positive interpersonal relationship
with someone.
Heartbreak refers to a failure of an existing LOVERS

Other emotion terms refer to emotions connected
motivation for the achievement of) active goals:

relationship.

to (and providing the

Interest refers to any positive emotion connected to an active goal (this
emotion is similar to the “interest-excitement” emotion of Izard, 1977;

Tomkins, 1962).
Hope refers to a positive emotion which resulted from an imagined goal
success and is connected to an active goal.

Worry refers to a negative emotion which resulted from an imagined goal
failure and is connected to an active goal.
Surprise is generated upon fortuitous success of a subgoal or upon
serendipitous discovery of a new plan for achieving an active top-level
goal (see Chapter 5). This emotion is associated with the appropriate
active top-level goal, and provides an additional force of motivation to
perform processing activity toward that goal.

Finally, a group of emotion terms are employed when the emotion is directed
toward someone:

Gratitude refers to a positive emotion which is directed toward a person
and connected to a succeeded goal.

CHAPTER 3. EMOTIONS AND DAYDREAMING

56

e Anger refers to a negative emotion which is directed toward a person and
connected to a failed goal.

e Humiliation refers to a negative emotion which resulted from a failed
SELF-ESTEEM goal and is directed toward a person (thus one might
conceive of humiliation as a combination of anger and embarrassment).
Emotions directed toward someone are generated when a top-level goal failure
occurs as a result of some input action of another person (as in LOVERS1).
In DAYDREAMER, these tables are used by the English generator in order
to generate an appropriate English word given an emotion represented in the
program. The generator selects a word according to:

e whether or not the emotion is directed toward someone

e whether or not the goal success or failure (if any) is an imagined alternative
e the kind of active top-level goal (or concern) associated with the emotion

(if any)
e the kind of succeeded or failed goal associated with the emotion (if any)
Each table is ordered from most broad to most specific; the most specific term
is selected by the English generator for any given emotion.
The words which we have chosen to describe emotions in DAYDREAMER
are only intended to be suggestive—there is no absolutely correct word for a
given situation.

For example,

“shame,”

“humiliation,”

and

“embarrassment”

are interchangeable according to most emotion theorists (Tomkins, 1962; Izard,
1977), whereas they are distinguished in the generator of DAYDREAMER. The
program does not “think in natural language.” Rather, the conceptual representations generated by the program are converted into natural language for
understanding by humans (and as a protocol of the program’s daydreams). The
English generator of DAYDREAMER is discussed in detail in Appendix B.
The words for emotions themselves, of course, have no functional role in the
behavior of DAYDREAMER. That is why we are not concerned with finding a
finite set of “primary” emotions (see, for example, Tomkins, 1962; Izard, 1977).
However, the representation of the emotion affects the behavior of the program,
since certain emotions activate certain daydreaming goals. For example, if a
negative emotion is directed toward someone, then a daydream of revenge may
be generated. The particular goal failure connected to this emotion will determine what type of revenge is sought. The particular values of the strengths of
emotions determine the choice among multiple concerns. Emotions thus provide one way of pruning (for better or for worse) the large space of daydreaming
possibilities.

3.3.

3.3.

DAYDREAMING

GOALS

Daydreaming

57

Goals

Daydreams are triggered in DAYDREAMER by a set, of goals above and beyond
the personal goals called daydreaming goals. Daydreaming goals are heuristics
for how to exploit surplus processing time in a useful way. They initiate processing whose purpose is to improve the ability of the system to satisfy its personal
goals in the present and in the future. They are thus related to Wilensky’s

(1983) “metagoals.”
Through analysis of a variety of daydream protocols, we have abstracted the
following collection of daydreaming goals:

RATIONALIZATION Modification of the interpretation of a previous personal goal failure in order to reduce the negative emotional state resulting
from that failure.

ROVING Shifting of attention from a personal goal failure to a positive
episode or imagined scenario in order to reduce the negative emotional
state resulting from that failure.
REVENGE Generation of imaginary scenarios of retaliation after another person thwarts a personal goal of the daydreamer.
REVERSAL Generation of imaginary alternative past or possible future scenarios in which a real past or imagined future personal goal failure is
prevented, in order to learn from real and imagined failures.
RECOVERY Generation of possible scenarios for achieving a personal goal
in the future which failed previously.
REHEARSAL Generation of possible future scenarios for achieving an active
personal goal.
REPERCUSSIONS
situation.

Exploration of the consequences of a hypothetical future

Once activated, a given daydreaming goal is achieved by the planning mechanism through the generation of one or more imaginary past or future sequences
of events. DAYDREAMER has a number of strategies for achieving each daydreaming goal; these strategies are represented as planning and inference rules.
Daydreaming goals are activated by emotions. Moreover, the emotion which
activates a given daydreaming goal becomes the motivation associated with that
goal. Thus daydreaming goals which result from emotions of higher strength
will be processed before goals resulting from emotions of lower strength.
In general, we have the following feedback loop: Emotions are activated
in response to real-world situations. These emotions then motivate daydreaming goals which influence future daydreaming. Daydreaming in turn modifies
the emotional state of the program and initiates new emotions. These new

58

CHAPTER 3. EMOTIONS AND DAYDREAMING

Top-level goals

en
Daydreaming goals_

Personal goals

fooNe nek eeee
Emotional

Leaming

daydreaming

daydreaming

goals

goals

SELF-ESTEEM FOOD ...

Nar

RATIONALIZATION ... REVERSAL REHEARSAL ...

Figure 3.1: Goal Taxonomy

emotions influence the future course of daydreaming through the motivation of
other daydreaming goals. New emotions are generated, which activate further
daydreaming goals, and so on.
As shown in Figure 3.1, top-level goals are divided up into daydreaming
goals and personal goals. Daydreaming goals are further divided into two categories: emotional daydreaming goals (RATIONALIZATION, ROVING, and
REVENGE) and learning daydreaming goals (REVERSAL, RECOVERY, REHEARSAL, and REPERCUSSIONS). The function of the first category of daydreaming goals is modification of emotional state, while the function of the
second category is learning.
The learning daydreaming goals have an impact on emotional state as well.
For example, daydreaming about REVERSAL of a prior failure may enable one
to feel less upset about that failure if there is no REVERSAL which the daydreamer could reasonably have been expected to perform in the past situation;
daydreaming about RECOVERY from a failure enables one to feel less upset
about that failure; REHEARSAL for a future event enables one to be less (and
sometimes more) worried about that event. Thus, learning daydreaming goals
have emotional consequences.
The emotional daydreaming goals have an impact on learning, since any
scenario generated through daydreaming has the potential for future application. For example, a daydream of revenge may be carried out in reality if the
daydreamer is sufficiently angry at a person or has been sufficiently wronged
and believes that retaliation would prevent future harm from the person. Mod-

ification of emotional state might itself be considered a form of learning since
emotional state affects future processing. Thus, emotional daydreaming goals
provide another source of daydream scenarios for potential use in the future.

4.3. DAYDREAMING GOALS

59

REPERCUSSIONS

Table 3.3: Daydreaming Goals

Daydreaming goals are activated when certain emotions are of sufficient
strength:

The RATIONALIZATION,

ROVING,

REVERSAL,

and RECOVERY

daydreaming goals are activated in response to negative emotions (such as embarrassment, rejection, and anger). The REVENGE daydreaming goal is activated in response to negative emotions directed toward another person or

persons (such as anger). The REHEARSAL

daydreaming goal is activated in

response to positive emotion of interest associated with an active personal goal
The REPERCUSSIONS daydreaming goal is not activated by emotions, but by
2 collection of heuristics. Daydreaming goals are summarized in Table 3.3. The
emotional daydreaming goals are discussed in detail in Chapter 3, while the
learning daydreaming goals are discussed in detail in Chapter 4. A concern
is called a personal goal concern if its top-level goal is a personal goal, and a
daydreaming goal concern if its top-level goal is a daydreaming goal.
Are daydreaming goals to rationalize, rehearse, and so on, cognitive entities of which humans are aware? Do humans pursue daydreaming goals nondeliberately or deliberately, involuntarily or voluntarily, automatically or with
effort? Are daydreaming goals conscious, learned, metacognitive (Flavell, 1979)
strategies for self-regulation, or are they innate and nonconscious? Humans
are sometimes aware of daydreaming goals, and sometimes not: Although each
of the daydreaming goals may be pursued deliberately, there are times when
each of these goals is pursued nondeliberately. On the two ends of the spec-

trum, ROVING is frequently performed as a deliberate strategy (this strategy
is similar to the various “guided daydreaming” and related therapy techniques,
see, for example, Desoille, 1966; Leuner, 1969), while REVENGE

is pursued

spontaneously (Izard, 1977, p. 335; Weiner, 1980a) and sometimes against the
wishes of the daydreamer. In the present work, we do not attempt to distinguish
deliberate from nondeliberate applications of daydreaming goals.
The problem of whether daydreaming goals are learned or innate is orthogonal to the problem of whether daydreaming goals are voluntary or involuntary:
learned processes which at first require effort may become automatic through

practice.

There is evidence that certain strategies for daydreaming may be

60

CHAPTER 3. EMOTIONS AND DAYDREAMING

learned starting at an early age (see, for example, Mischel, 1979; G. H. Green,

1923); other evidence (Darwin, 1872; Izard, 1977) points to the innate nature of

certain external and internal behaviors. For simplicity, DAYDREAMER models
an adult daydreamer assumed to have a fixed, hard-wired set of daydreaming
goals. The program is not capable of learning this set of daydreaming goals, nor
is it able to extend this set. However, DAYDREAMER does have the capacity
to learn new strategies, or plans, for achieving existing daydreaming goals.

3.4

Emotional Feedback

System

In DAYDREAMER, the emotional daydreaming goals model human daydreaming in response to a negative emotion resulting from a real goal failure. Specifically, RATIONALIZATION, ROVING, and REVENGE generate scenarios which
result in positive emotions; these positive emotions offset the original negative
emotions. What, then, is the purpose of reducing negative emotions?
Negative emotions serve the important function of motivating the program
to take appropriate actions in response to whatever real or imagined negative
situation caused those emotions: Via the REVERSAL daydreaming goal, the
program attempts to prevent the occurrence in the future of failures similar to
a real or imagined goal failure. Negative emotions thus indicate to the program
that there is a threat, and that the program should take actions to eliminate
this threat.
If negative emotions are useful, then why is it necessary for the emotional
daydreaming goals to reduce negative emotions? The reason is that excessive
negative emotions, and negative emotions lasting longer than necessary to motivate appropriate behaviors, have a negative impact. In humans, some of the
effects of a long-term negative emotional state (such as depression and other

negative moods) are decreased interpersonal attraction (Gouaux, 1971), lowered expectations of success (Loeb, Beck, & Diggory, 1971), increased recall of
negative memories (Bower & Cohen, 1982; Clark & Isen, 1982), and low selfesteem, loss of satisfaction from activities, and loss of motivation (Beck, 1967,
pp. 10-43). Negative emotional states also lead to negative behavior, which
often leads to further negative feedback from the external world: If, for example, the daydreamer is angry at a person and retaliates against that person, the
person may retaliate against the daydreamer, causing further anger, and so on.
In DAYDREAMER, emotional states, both positive and negative, tend to
strengthen themselves for the following reasons: First, since episodes are indexed
in DAYDREAMER by emotions, episodes congruent with the current emotional
state are retrieved. In addition, emotions associated with a retrieved episode are
parteally reactivated. As a result, the current emotional state is strengthened.
Second, retrieved episodes are employed analogically in the generation of day-

dream scenarios (see Chapter 4). Thus, retrieved episodes congruent with the
current emotional state result in analogous goal outcome scenarios, resulting in

3.4.

EMOTIONAL

FEEDBACK SYSTEM

61

congruent emotional responses.
Nonetheless, the emotional state of the program does not continue to increase in a positive or negative direction: emotion decay counteracts the above
strengthening effects. The decay of emotions, of course, must not be too steep,
or the motivating function of emotions would be lost and the program would
fail to generate any behavior. The net effect of strengthening and decay is that
a positive or negative emotional state tends to perpetuate.

In DAYDREAMER,

negative emotional states are undesirable because:

(a)

negative emotional states indicate that the system is failing to achieve its personal goals, (b) negative emotional states lead to the recall of negative episodes
resulting in the analogical generation of negative daydreams, and (c) negative
emotional states tend to perpetuate themselves. Thus, negative emotional states
result in negative daydreams and, ultimately, behavior which hinders the achievement of personal goals. Positive emotional states, on the other hand, are desirable, because they indicate that the program is achieving its personal goals.
Thus we would like the program to strive for a positive emotional state. Emotional daydreaming goals provide a way of breaking a cycle of negative emotions
and bringing the program into a more positive emotional state.

A diagram of the full emotional feedback system of DAYDREAMER is shown
in Figure 3.2. Negative emotions activate various daydreaming goals, several of
which ultimately result in the generation of positive emotions (RATIONALIZATION, REVENGE, and ROVING) and others which may result in positive
or negative emotions (REVERSAL and RECOVERY). Positive emotions activate REHEARSAL daydreaming goals and motivate external behavior—both of
which may result in positive or negative emotions. Other sources, the activation of a new concern, and the occurrence of a serendipity (accidental discovery
of a solution to a problem) may result in positive emotions. (For simplicity,
this diagram does not indicate that episodes can be retrieved for reasons other
than active positive or negative emotions, that negative daydreams might still
be generated in response to a positive episode and vice versa, and that, if unsuccessful, RATIONALIZATION might actually result in a negative emotion.
. It also ignores the negation of the sign of emotional responses resulting from

alternative past scenarios.)
Instead of RATIONALIZATION, why could we not simply inject the program with a dose of positive emotion whenever it is unhappy? This is, after
all, what ROVING does. Why does rationalization have to be “reasonable”? In
DAYDREAMER, emotions associated with an episode are modified through ratio-

nalization of a goal failure associated with the episode. Bower and Cohen (1982)

call this emotional “reappraisal” of an episode. The next time the episode is
retrieved, the modified emotion will be activated. Thus, rationalization reduces
the likelihood of negative emotional states in the long term, in addition to providing short-term reduction of negative emotions. The consistent application
of rationalization can get the program out of a depressed state (if we use the
term depressed to mean both a short- as well as long-term negative emotional

CHAPTER 3. EMOTIONS AND DAYDREAMING

62

Real Success <4¢————- External

Behavior

Feal Failure

emotional

Goal activation

aie

response

Serendipity

ae

Pos Emotion

Za

wi

ae

Roving
frorsant

Retrieve pos episode

saya

emotion

vA
reactivation

Rationalization, Revenge
Recovery, Reversal
Retrieve neg episode

analogy

emotional

\

Imagined success <@—Rehearsal ————_

analogy
|magined

failure

Aes
emotiona
responses

response

Figure 3.2: The Emotional Feedback System

state). (See Beck, 1967, for a related discussion of a “circular feedback model”
of depression.)
Why should we bother implementing these human “features,” the negative
side effects of negative emotions? Perhaps a program would be much better
off if episodic recail were not sensitive to emotions, if anger did not generate
retaliation, and so on. In humans, these apparent artifacts are fundamental
aspects of the emotional system and its adaptive purpose.
Pervasiveness of
emotional state is necessary to prevent one from becoming distracted from the
problem at hand. By pervasiveness, we mean that emotions are generalized
to situations other than that which caused those emotions—for example, after
being insulted by one’s boss, one may later take it out on a friend, one may hug
the nearest person after winning the state lottery, and so on. The motivational
function of negative emotions would be lost if one could simply direct attention
to another topic while avoiding any cognitive impact of the negative emotion
from the original topic. It is because negative emotions interfere with normal
operation of the entire person that they serve as a fundamental driving force
toward adaptive behavior. Negative emotions must have a global effect if they
are to retain their utility as a motivator. A similar argument could be made
for computer programs such as DAYDREAMER, where evulution consists of
modifications by the programmer enabling the system to function adaptively.
There is another function of the emotional daydreaming goals. In humans,
emotional well-being contributes to biological well-being. Various relaxation and
imagery techniques, such as progressive relaxation, guided affective imagery, and
biofeedback appear to induce beneficial physiological changes (see, for example,
Luthe, 1969; J. L. Singer & Pope, 1978). These effects, however, are impossible

3.5.

RATIONALIZATION

63
Roving
Revenge

Negative

q__teduces

emotion

Positive
emotion

reduces

Rationalization
Minimization
Imagined
Mixed blessi
————® alternat
ngive
External
attribution —®failure

Hidden

blessing ————®» Imagined
success

Figure 3.3: The Emotional Daydreaming Goals

to simulate in the nonbiological DAYDREAMER.
In the following sections, we discuss specific strategies for RATIONALIZATION, REVENGE, and ROVING. These strategies, and their impact on emotions, are summarized in Figure 3.3.

3.5

Rationalization

When one is unhappy, one’s daydreams often turn towards consolations or
thoughts designed to alleviate the unhappiness—one tries to make oneself feel
better, to rationalize a goal failure in some way. The daydreams RATIONALIZATIONI1 and RATIONALIZATION2 (see page 4) are examples. We define
rationalization as any process for adjusting one’s interpretation of a situation in
order to reduce the negative emotional consequences of that situations. In effect,
. rationalization provides a way of reducing the cognitive dissonance (Festinger,

1957) resulting from a goal failure.
Rationalization is a frequent component of daydreaming: Varendonck (1921)
noticed the rationalization aspect of daydreaming in his hypothesis-rejoinder
pairs: “Every thought in the second list implies a soothing process, a consolation, a reparation for the unpleasant impression left on the mind by the

recollections in the first list” (pp. 249-250).

Izard (1977) reports that 18.2 of

the subjects presented with photographs representing the emotion of shame described the thoughts resulting from that emotion as “rationalize, escape from
feeling.” (p. 398) Hofstadter (1985, pp. 257-259) gives examples of creative
variations on a theme called “subjunctive instant replays”; in our terminology
these are alternative past scenarios which function as rationalizations (or as
their opposite).

CHAPTER 3. EMOTIONS AND DAYDREAMING

64

The RATIONALIZATION
tion of sufficient strength:
IF
THEN

daydreaming goal is activated by a negative emo-

NEG-EMOTION

of sufficient strength resulting
from a FAILED-GOAL
ACTIVE-GOAL for RATIONALIZATION of failure

Humans will also sometimes rationalize an anticipated future goal failure:
that is, an emotion of worry about a future failure may be reduced through
rationalization of that potential failure should it occur. One may also employ
rationalization to reduce a negative emotional state when a particular personal
goal cannot be attempted or achieved in real life because of negative social or
other consequences. These cases are ignored in the current version of DAYDREAMER for simplicity.
Once RATIONALIZATION is active, how is it achieved? That is, how are
rationalization daydreams produced? In this section, we describe four methods
for rationalization: mixed blessing, hidden blessing, external attribution, and
minimization.

3.5.1

Rationalization by Mixed Blessing

In rationalization by mixed blessing, one explores a hypothetical situation in
which the goal succeeded instead of failed, and attempts to find negative consequences of that situation. That is, rateonalization by mized blessing involves
generation of a scenario in which the imagined success of the goal which failed in
reality leads to an imagined goal failure. This plan for rationalization, employed

in RATIONALIZATION1, is expressed by the following rule:!
IF

ACTIVE-GOAL

for RATIONALIZATION

THEN

ACTIVE-GOAL

for success to LEADTO

of failure

THEN

NEG-EMOTION associated with failure less
than a certain strength or POS-EMOTION associated
with failure
RATIONALIZATION of failure

failure

The strength of the emotion associated with the goal failure is then modified
via a mechanism first presented in Chapter 2: During planning, any emotion
generated as a result of a side-effect personal goal outcome is associated with
the current concern, and the strength of such an emotion is diverted to the
primary motivating emotion of that concern.?. This mechanism rewards concerns
‘Note that mixed blessing scenarios in DAYDREAMER

are instances of Lehnert’s (1982)

MIXED BLESSING plot unit.
Since, in general, more than one emotion can provide the emotion for a given concern, the
primary motivating emotion of a concern is the emotion which first resulted in the creation

of the concern (such as a negative emotion resulting from goal failure), or which was first
activated upon creation of the concern (such as a motivating positive interest emotion created
upon personal goal activation).

3.5.

RATIONALIZATION

65

generating additional positive emotions in planning to achieve a top-level goal
and discourages concerns generating additional negative emotions. Now recall

that:

e a goal failure generated in an alternative past scenario results in the positive emotion of relief whose strength is proportional to the realism of the
scenario and the importance of the goal which failed (while a goal success
results in the negative emotion of regret)
e the negative emotion associated with the goal failure is the same as the
motivating emotion associated with the active RATIONALIZATION goal
Consequently, goal successes and failures which result during planning will, respectively, increase or decrease the strength of the negative emotion. Thus if
an imagined goal failure is generated, the original goal failure will be rationalized in proportion to the strength of the new positive emotion of relief resulting
from the goal failure. However, if an imagined goal success is generated, the
opposite of a rationalization will result: A new negative emotion of regret will
be activated and the strength of the original negative emotion will be increased.

3.5.2

Rationalization by Hidden Blessing

When someone is unhappy because of some negative situation, event, or out- .
come, we often tell that person to “look on the bright side” —to shift attention
to the positive aspects of the situation in order to feel better. This is also
expressed in the proverb “Every cloud has a silver lining.” Employed in RATIONALIZATION2, rationalization by hidden blessing involves generation of a
scenario in which a real goal failure leads to a real or imagined goal success:?
IF

ACTIVE-GOAL

for RATIONALIZATION

THEN

ACTIVE-GOAL

for failure to LEADTO

of failure

success

Since this form of rationalization involves generation of a present or future—
. rather than alternative past—scenario, goal failures which are generated in the
course of planning result in negative emotions and goal successes result in a
positive emotions. Thus resulting goal successes will decrease the strength of
the original negative emotion and goal failures will increase the strength of the
original negative emotion. Thus when a goal success is generated, the original
goal failure will be rationalized in proportion to the strength of the new positive
emotion resulting from the goal success. Of course, if a goal failure is generated,
DAYDREAMER is further away from a rationalization than when it started: A
new negative emotion will be activated and the strength of the original negative
emotion will be increased.
are instances of both Lehnert’s
plot unit and Dyer’s (1983a) thematic abstraction unit TAU-

3Note that hidden blessing scenarios in DAYDREAMER

(1982) HIDDEN BLESSING
HIDDEN-BLESSING.

CHAPTER 3. EMOTIONS AND DAYDREAMING

66

3.5.3.

Rationalization by External Attribution

Another method for rationalization is suggested by attribution theory (Heider,
1958; Kelley, 1967). An attribution is the cause or causes that one attributes
to a past success or failure. Attributions have an impact on emotional state.
In this framework, rationalization may be viewed as the process of finding an
attribution with the most positive emotional consequences or with the least

amount of “cognitive dissonance” (Festinger, 1957).
For failures, finding an external attribution—attributing the failure to another person, lack of luck, environmental factors, lack of ability, lack of effort,
or fatigue—will often reduce a negative emotion resulting from blaming oneself
for a failure. Thus, external attribution is another possible strategy for rationalization.
External attribution is not currently implemented as a separate strategy in
DAYDREAMER but rather is accomplished as follows:
e The REVERSAL goal attempts to generate an alternative past scenario
which might have prevented the failure (as described in detail in Chap-

ter 4).
e The alternative scenario leads to the same goal failure.

e A positive emotion of relief results (because this is an alternative past
scenario), reducing the strength of the negative emotion associated with
the original goal failure.
If the above occurs for each alternative past scenario, the following external
attribution may be made: “No matter what I might have done, the failure would
still have resulted.” Of course, if the REVERSAL is successful, the negative
emotion of regret results. This situation occurs in REVERSAL1.
Another mechanism in DAYDREAMER relates to external attribution: A
negative emotion resulting from a personal goal failure is directed toward another
person when an input action of that person is the cause for the failure. However,
this does not result in a reduction of the strength of the negative emotion, but
rather a shift of the kind of emotion from displeasure to anger (which is then

handled by the REVENGE

3.5.4

daydreaming goal.)

Rationalization by Minimization

Suppose that, in LOVERS1, the movie star mentions the name of a famous
director and DAYDREAMER responds that she has never heard of that director,
and she is embarrassed as a result. Here are several rationalizations that might
result from such an experience:

He knows that most people have never heard of that director anyway.

3.6.

REVENGE

67

He might have just thought I was playing dumb to engage him in
conversation.
He wouldn’t dismiss someone simply because she had never heard of
that director.
I don’t think much of him anyway.

How might rationalizations such as the above be generated? Rationalization
by minimization involves reducing the likelihood of a goal failure and correspondingly the strength of the resulting negative emotion through the generation of
reasons why antecedents of that goal failure are not necessarily true (and sometimes merely by asserting the negation of those antecedents). (This process is
named after a similar process discussed by Plutchik, 1980.)
An antecedent for embarrassment is a negative judgment by another person
of the self. A negative judgment might result if a person expects everyone to have
certain knowledge and believes another person does not have that knowledge.
Thus the first rationalization above may be produced: The movie star in fact
does not expect everyone to know about the particular director. The second
rationalization results from a negation of the other half of the rule: The movie
star in fact does not believe the daydreamer does not know about the director,
and an alternative belief of the star regarding the reason for the behavior of the
daydreamer is generated. The third rationalization above amounts to a negation
of the negative judgment rule itself. The fourth rationalization negates another
antecedent for embarrassment: having a positive attitude toward the person one
is embarrassed in front of.
In general, for each fact which led to the negative emotion, the daydreamer
attempts to generate a reasoning chain which shows the negation of that fact.
If the daydreamer is successful in showing the negation of the fact with a given
strength or degree of likelihood s’, then the strength of the original non-negated

fact s is adjusted to be s/(s + s’). In some cases, an attempt to minimize will
backfire since worse consequences may result from the process.
DAYDREAMER produces two minimizations in the daydream RATIONAL-

> IZATIONS (see page 5). In the current version of DAYDREAMER, minimization
may negate attitudes without justification. The impact of the new attitude on
other attitudes of the program is then evaluated through the application of inference rules. However, there is currently no way for the program to reject an
attitude which would result in cognitive dissonance (Heider, 1958; Festinger,
1957) when evaluated with respect to the program’s overall belief system, as is

done in Abelson’s (1963) program.

3.6

Revenge

When one is angry at a person because that person has caused a failure for the
self, one often daydreams about retaliation against the person or getting back

CHAPTER 3. EMOTIONS AND DAYDREAMING

68

at that person. An example is the daydream REVENGE] (see page 4).
Human daydreaming is often concerned with revenge: Items of the Imaginal
Processes Inventory (J. L. Singer & Antrobus, 1972) refer to ways of “getting
even,” “rubbing it in,” “attaining revenge,” and so on. Izard (1977) reports
that when subjects (approximately 130 college students) were presented with
photographs representing the emotion of anger, 43.9 percent of the subjects described the thoughts that follow from experiencing that emotion as “of revenge,
attacking others, destruction” (p. 335).
The REVENGE daydreaming goal is activated by a directed negative emotion (such as anger and humiliation) of sufficient strength:
IF
THEN

NEG-EMOTION toward person resulting from
a FAILED-GOAL
ACTIVE-GOAL to gain REVENGE against person

In this section, we investigate the purpose of revenge daydreams, and discuss
some strategies for generating them.

3.6.1

The Purpose of Revenge Daydreams

Achieving revenge in a daydream results in a positive emotion of satisfaction.
Should we then conclude that the function of revenge daydreaming is to make
one feel better after experiencing a goal failure caused by another? It seems
that revenge daydreams sometimes have the effect of intensifying, rather than
reducing, the original anger. If this is true, we must question the utility of
revenge daydreaming.
It has sometimes been proposed that daydreaming serves a catharsis function
(Breuer & S. Freud, 1895/1937)—that through daydreaming one may partially
discharge aggression in order to prevent its often damaging expression in real
life. Some studies (Feshbach, 1956) have, in fact, found a reduction in aggression after engaging in fantasy activity. However, other studies have failed to
support this hypothesis: In an experiment conducted by Paton (1972), subjects were insulted while performing a task. Afterwards, one group was shown
pictures containing aggressive material, while another was shown nonaggressive
pictures. These two groups were then given a chance to daydream and to report
their daydreams to the experimenter. A third group had no opportunity to
daydream. Those who had a chance to engage in fantasies exhibited less anger
after being insulted than those who did not. However, those who had had aggressive fantasies exhibited less reduction of anger than those who had had more
neutral fantasies. J. L. Singer (1975) proposes that reduction of anger through
daydreaming is accomplished primarily through shift of the focus of attention
away from the anger toward more pleasant fantasies, rather than through a
catharsis effect. This would suggest that reduction of anger is accomplished
more successfully through a strategy such as our ROVING daydreaming goal
than through REVENGE.

3.6.

REVENGE

69

What is the function of the emotion of anger which gives rise to revenge?
Anger is a safety mechanism which ensures that we will try to resist being
wronged or “stepped on” by others. It motivates us to fight back against those
who harm us—to stand up for ourselves—and as such is an adaptive emotion

(Izard, 1977).

Revenge daydreaming thus has the potential to generate realistic plans for
retaliatory actions necessary in some situations. Through daydreaming, one
may consider the consequences of retaliation in order to determine whether or
not such actions are desirable. While a particular unrealistic scenario (such as
REVENGE1) might not be worthwhile to pursue, a variation or outgrowth of
such a scenario may turn out to be useful in recovery or adaptive retaliations
to prevent recurrences. Thus revenge daydreaming is another way of generating
scenarios which may or may not lead to productive use.
We conclude tentatively that the purpose of revenge daydreaming is to generate scenarios of potential future use for both retaliation and other purposes,
and to provide a short-term positive emotional benefit. However, if an organism
gets carried away with revenge daydreaming the results can be destructive. If
the organism devoted more and more energy to bigger and better retaliations
it would lose sight of reality; it would be obsessed. This effect would occur if
revenge satisfaction intensified the original anger, causing further daydreams of
revenge, resulting in even greater anger, and so on.

3.6.2

Achievement

of Revenge

In order to get even with a person for thwarting a personal goal of the self,
one must cause a personal goal failure for that person. The importance of
the personal goal should be approximately the same as the self personal goal
thwarted by the person. Two specific strategies are used in DAYDREAMER to
accomplish such goal failures: turning the tables and physical harm.
Revenge by turning the tables involves causing the failure of a similar goal to
the goal of the self thwarted by the person. A specific rule accomplishes this form
_ of revenge for failed FRIENDS, LOVERS, and EMPLOYMENT relationships:

THEN

ACTIVE-GOAL to gain REVENGE against person
for causing self a failed POS-RELATIONSHIP
goal
ACTIVE-GOAL for person to have failure of
same POS-RELATIONSHIP

Revenge by physical harm involves generation of a scenario in which the
person who caused a self goal failure is physically damaged. Such scenarios are
generated by the following rule:
IF
THEN

against person

ACTIVE-GOAL

for REVENGE

ACTIVE-GOAL

for person to have FAILED-GOAL

of NOT

being HURT

CHAPTER 3. EMOTIONS AND DAYDREAMING

70

This rule results in the following daydream:

REVENGE4
| want to get even with my boss for firing me.
pleased.

3.7

| beat her up. | feel

Roving

One method of feeling better when one is upset is to ignore the negative feelings
and divert attention to a more positive topic. An example is the daydream

ROVINGI1 (see page 5).
This strategy, which we call roving, is often employed in daydreaming: According to J. L. Singer (1975), positive daydreaming is frequently used as a form
of self-entertainment, or as a diversion or form of escape from negative emotions

and thoughts. Izard (1977) reports that 15.0 percent of subjects (approximately
130 college students) shown photographs representing the emotion of disgust described the following thoughts as “of others, trying to forget, escape situation”
(p. 339).
The ROVING daydreaming goal is activated by any negative emotion of
sufficient strength:
IF

NEG-EMOTION of sufficient strength resulting
from a FAILED-GOAL

THEN

ACTIVE-GOAL

for ROVING

Employed in ROVING], a strategy for roving is to recall any particularly
pleasant episode—real or daydreamed:
IF

ACTIVE-GOAL

for ROVING

THEN _ recall pleasant episode

Beck (1967, p. 330) reports he was able to alleviate patients’ feelings of inadequacy by instructing them to recall past successes. (However, recalling a past
success can also have a negative effect if the daydreamer starts wishing that the
past success could happen again.) Another plan is to generate a wish-fulfillment
daydream, or a daydream in which an active top-level goal is achieved. (However, in DAYDREAMER this is accomplished via the REHEARSAL daydreaming
goal.)
Although ROVING in response to a negative emotion associated with a goal
failure reduces or eliminates the negative emotional state of the program, it
does not enable the program to deal directly with the goal failure by recovering
from the failure or determining how to avoid future similar goal failures. Rather,

these functions are provided by the REVERSAL and REHEARSAL daydreaming
goals, respectively.

Nonetheless,

ROVING

may be important

to reduce the

3.8.

EMOTIONS AS MOTIVATION

fe

negative emotional state of the program to a point where it can then perform
such constructive activities.
When a negative emotion of sufficient strength is activated, several daydreaming goals are activated in response and that emotion becomes the motivating emotion for each of those goals. Thus no one daydreaming goal has
priority over the other. (A discussion of how daydreaming goals might be pri-

oritized is presented elsewhere [E. T. Mueller, 1987b].)

3.8

Emotions

as Motivation

We view emotions as the primary motivation for external and internal (or day-

dreaming) behavior.

How is this view justified? Varendonck (1921) has previ-

ously offered the similar view that daydreaming “is a mental process in which
the ideation is directed by our affects according to the pleasure-and-pain prin-

ciple.” (p. 255) Klinger (1971, pp. 202-206) also views affect as instigators and
guides of daydreaming and other behavior. The concept of emotions as motivation derives from Darwin (1872), who investigated the expressions, movements,
postures, and gestures which emotions give rise to, and the value of these emotional reactions for the welfare of the organism—for example, fear prepares the
organism for attack of an unknown object. Tomkins (1962) argues that emotions
are the primary motivational system in humans and that biological drives only
have motivational impact when accompanied and amplified by emotions. Izard

(1977) and Plutchik (1980) take similar views. Other theorists (Lazarus, 1968;
Mandler, 1975), however, argue against the concept of emotions as motivation.
Because our view is somewhat controversial, we examine the arguments for and
against the view in some detail.
Lazarus (1968, pp. 178-189) presents the following arguments against the
view of emotions as motivation:
e This concept distracts our attention from studying emotions as real states
or responses (because emotions become subsumed under concepts of mo-

tivation and drive).
e This concept distracts us from the causes of emotions (because emotions
tend to be defined in terms of what adaptive actions follow the emotion).
e This concept tends to encourage one-dimensional emotional constructs,
such as fear and anxiety.

e This concept tends to separate out components of the total emotional
event in a misleading way (such as adaptive acts which are “disconnected”
from the emotion itself and made a consequence of emotion).
e This concept is not predictive of adaptive response, since additional information beyond the emotions themselves is needed to predict the specific
response.

CHAPTER 3. EMOTIONS AND DAYDREAMING

%2

We respond to these arguments as follows: Does viewing emotions as motivation distract us from the true nature of the emotions? Although in the
present work we have not concentrated upon the phenomenology of emotions,
other researchers who view emotions as motivation have explored the nature of
the emotions in detail, including facial expressions and the subjective experience

of emotions (Izard, 1977).
Does the view of emotions as motivation distract our attention from the
conditions which result in certain emotions?
On the contrary, in order for
emotions to function as motivation, it is necessary to examine the situations in
which certain emotions are activated. Thus in DAYDREAMER, an emotion of
worry is activated when a future goal failure is imagined, and this emotion then
functions as motivation to plan to prevent the imagined failure.
Lazarus (1968, p. 183) claims that in viewing emotions as motivation one
easily forgets that emotions are an intervening variable, and one may end up
stating that emotions, by themselves, cause behavior. Although we do not claim
that emotions by themselves cause behavior, we do claim that emotions motivate
behavior. What, then, do we really mean by motivation? Motivation has the
following specific definitions in DAYDREAMER:
e The activation of certain concerns in response to certain emotions: Of
course, various conditions lead to the activation of those emotions. Can
we then eliminate the intervening variable of emotions? A measure of
simplicity would be lost if we did: Since a given emotion can activate
more than one kind of concern, the complete conditions for the activation
of each concern activated by the same conditions would have to be repeated
for each such concern. On the other hand, different emotions can activate
the same kind of concern. Again, the specific conditions for activation of
a certain kind of concern would have to be added to that concern.
e Selection from among multiple courses of action: At any time, the concern
whose motivating emotions have the highest strength is performed. The
strength of an emotion is determined initially by the conditions which
activated the emotion, and is subject to modification under various other
conditions.

Emotions are therefore a useful abstraction in DAYDREAMER for capturing the
various conditions for activation of concerns and selection from among multiple
concerns. Emotions provide generalizations of the current situation—each active
emotion contains only the information necessary to select appropriate kinds of
concerns for activation and processing. Of course we still have the following
problem: Are the emotion constructs which we have postulated the same as what
we call “emotions” in humans? Resolution of this problem, however, requires
no less than solutions to the mind-body problem and the problem of the nature
of scientific explanation. Whether or not our emotion constructs correspond
to
human emotions, the use of such constructs in intelligent computer systems may

3.8.

EMOTIONS AS MOTIVATION

73

be justified on processing grounds alone: Some mechanism is necessary to direct
processing when it is possible for more than one concern to be active at any given
moment. Emotions provide such a mechanism. Furthermore, emotions provide
a useful abstraction enabling the activation of adaptive activities—such as those
provided by daydreaming goals—in appropriate situations.
Does viewing emotions as motivation imply that our emotional constructs
will be narrow? Not at all—we distinguish 19 emotions in DAYDREAMER.
Have we separated out the components of emotion in a misleading way? As
argued above, emotions provide useful abstractions. In order to identify appropriate abstractions, we have divided the problem into two components: How
and when are certain emotions activated and modified? What is the influence
of active emotions upon behavior? Simply because the antecedents and consequents of emotions are described separately does not mean that they are not
“part” of the total emotions.
Does viewing emotions as motivation imply that emotions are insufficient to
predict specific responses? This is not the case: In DAYDREAMER, it is necessary to retain any and all information within emotions that will be necessary to
activate specific concerns. Of course, processing activity on behalf of that concern may be influenced not only by the emotions motivating that activity, but
by the entire system state. It is unreasonable to require that the performance
of a concern depend upon its motivating emotion and nothing else.
There is some experimental evidence for the view of emotions as motivation. For example, Weiner (1980a) conducted experiments to test the hypothesis that emotions such as pity and anger—rather than the abstract attributions
of uncontrollability and controllability which are related to those respective
emotions—are the direct motivators of actions such as help and lack of help,
respectively. In these experiments, subjects were given various stories involving
interpersonal requests for assistance, and asked to assess the controllability or
uncontrollability of the need, to rate the level of pity or anger, and to rate the
likelihood of giving assistance. The hypothesis was supported: It was found that
the relationship between pity and help, and between anger and withdrawal, was
_ not altered when the perceived controllability was statistically held constant.
Furthermore, when the emotions were held constant, the relationship between
controllability and assistance was greatly reduced.
It is logically possible that the feeling of an emotion (that which to humans
is the emotion) itself does not result in a given behavior. That is, perhaps the
feeling is an epiphenomenon which accompanies, but does not cause, a certain
behavior. However, humans are aware of the feeling of emotions and, as a
result, this feeling may have a causal impact. But can the feeling of emotions
be described as motivational? Such feelings may be considered as motivations
at least in the sense that through metacognitive strategies one may decide to
perform a certain behavior as a result of feeling a certain emotional state: “I
feel depressed. I don’t want to feel depressed. I should do something about
this feeling.” But once such a decision is made, what carries out the decision?

74

CHAPTER 3. EMOTIONS AND DAYDREAMING

Presumably, the hardware of the brain, which is already in motion. At some
point one must postulate a construct which determines what the brain will
do next. Whether or not this construct is identical with emotions is an open
question. We assume for the time being that it is.

3.9

Idiosyncratic Feeling States

Salaman (1970) describes a phenomenon which she calls “involuntary
memories”—the unexpected and sudden recall of a past experience accompanied by strong emotions and the sensation that one is living in an instant of
the past. There is an overwhelming feeling that the past moment is being experienced exactly as it was originally experienced. For Salaman, involuntary
memories appeared to be linked to a shock or disturbance which had otherwise
been inaccessible to conscious thought.
A large number of such memories started coming back to Salaman when
she was in her early fifties and writing about her childhood. She gives examples of involuntary memories described by other autobiographers and novelists:
Chateaubriand, Proust, and De Quincey. Why are not more people aware of
such memories? Salaman believes her involuntary memories were a result of
her continued interest in past memories and attempt to recreate them in her
writing. If one does not attend to these elusive experiences, she says, one may
be aware merely of a slight change in mood. Involuntary memories are an interesting topic for future psychological and philosophical investigation: How
accurate are these memories both in terms of their abstract contents and their
phenomenological contents? Are prior feeling states reproduced authentically?
What do we mean by “authentic reproduction”? As Hofstadter (Hofstadter &
Dennett, 1981, p. 413) points out, knowing what it truly felt like to be “me” seconds, days, months, or years ago suffers from the same philosophical problems

as knowing what it feels like to be someone else (Nagel, 1974).
Although involuntary memories may be rare occurrences, most people are
familiar with the profound memory recall effects (James, 1890a, p. 556) produced by certain smells, tastes, sounds (especially music and voices), seasonal
changes, locations, and other stimuli. These triggers sometimes activate strong
unique feeling states associated with a particular past personal experience or
era. For example, try using a particular brand of soap which you have not used
for years. This will most likely bring back a whole set of feelings associated with
the time when you were using that soap.
McKellar (1957, pp. 51-72) also discusses several types of subjective experiences which occur in the general population: the “falling experience” before
falling asleep at night (reported by 75.87 percent of 182 subjects in a questionnaire study), déja vu (reported by 69.23 percent), hypnagogic imagery (a kind
of dreaming involving imagery which occurs just before falling asleep, reported

by 63.18 percent), hypnopompic imagery (a kind of dreaming involving imagery

3.9.

IDIOSYNCRATIC FEELING STATES

75

which occurs while waking up, reported by 21.42 percent), synesthesia (a stimulus in one sensory modality evoking an image in another modality, reported by
21.42 percent), diagram forms (visual imagery of a spatial arrangement corresponding to numbers, days of the week, months of the year, and so on, reported
by 7.69 percent), and color associations (associating colors with, say, days of
the week, reported by 20.41 percent of 191 subjects).
Do such feeling states influence behavior or are they merely epiphenomenal?
Certainly, such states affect mood, which in turn affects behavior. One may
also comment to a friend on having experienced such a state. But what is
the unique contribution of a particular feeling state? What are these feeling
states? How might they be represented in a computer program? Might we
be able to build such states out of a set of “primary” feelings or emotions
(see, for example, Izard, 1977; Tomkins, 1962) mixed in various combinations?
‘For example, could a certain idiosyncratic feeling state be represented as 60
percent interest-excitement, 20 percent guilt, and 20 percent shame? Although
such emotional mixtures describe an infinite set of distinct emotional states, we
doubt that these mixtures would be able to capture the richness, variety, and
idiosyncrasy of personal feeling states (Salaman, 1970; James, 1890b, pp. 454,
468).
Although the true nature and influence on behavior of such feeling states is a
topic for future research, we hypothesize that these subjective states result from
a sufficiently complex conceptual representation. DAYDREAMER, for instance,
does not have a set of fundamental emotions, since emotions are represented as
arbitrary data structures. That is, although a particular data structure may
be designated as an emotion, what is really important is the relationship of '
this data structure to other data structures and how these data structures are
employed in processing. English words such as embarrassment are employed
merely for convenience in understanding the operation of the program: The English generator contains a set of templates interpreting certain emotional data
structures connected in a certain way to other data structures as certain emotions. One such connection is the association between a personal goal outcome
and the emotional data structure—for example, a negative emotion resulting
from a failure of the SOCIAL ESTEEM personal goal is generated as embarrassment. But suppose some new, idiosyncratic personal goal (such as recharging
by plugging into a wall outlet) is acquired by the program. How, then, should
the corresponding emotion be named? Perhaps there is no equivalent emotion
in a human!
Although the subjective aspect of feelings is indeed a difficult philosophical
paradox (Nagel, 1974; Dennett, 1978), we propose that the behavioral impact
of what we call complex feeling states (including verbal descriptions of these
states) results from a very complex conceptual representation—that complex
feeling states are in fact identical to complex conceptual representations. L. B.

Meyer (1956) takes a similar view in his analysis of emotional and intellectual
responses to (nonsymbolic) music. Zajonc (1980), however, argues that affective

CHAPTER 3. EMOTIONS AND DAYDREAMING

76

judgments can occur to stimuli before cognitive understandings of those stimuli
are formed, and thus that affect and cognition are partially independent. We
would reply that although emotions may indeed occur prior to other, more
“cold” conscious cognitions, some cognitive process must still have caused those
emotions—perhaps a nonconscious one.

3.10

Previous

Related

Work

in Emotions

Several researchers have previously argued the importance of emotions in theories of cognition: Neisser (1963) wrote that emotions are “conspicuously absent
from existing or contemplated computer programs” (p. 195) and that “[h]uman
thinking begins in an intimate association with emotions and feelings which is
never entirely lost.” (p. 195) Norman (1981) included emotions in his list of 12
issues for cognitive science. Sloman and Croucher (1981) argued the necessity
of emotions in robots.
Since the psychological literature on emotions is quite large (see, for example,
Mandler, 1975 and Izard, 1977 for overviews), in this section we review only
the work in psychology and artificial intelligence most relevant to our current
research, specifically, the (to our knowledge) unimplemented emotion models of
Simon, Abelson, Weiner, and Bower and Cohen, and the implemented models
of Colby, Dyer, and Pfeifer.

3.10.1

Simon’s Interruption Mechanism

An early system which handles multiple goals is described by Simon (1967).
When the system notices a high-priority need, processing toward the current
goal is interrupted so that processing may be performed to handle the new goal.
Simon equates this interruption mechanism with emotional behavior and the
corresponding subjective feelings in humans.

3.10.2

Colby’s PARRY

Colby (1973, 1975, 1981) constructed a computer simulation, called PARRY, of
a paranoid patient participating in a psychiatric interview. PARRY is similar to
DAYDREAMER in that it uses emotional states to modify and motivate behaviors. In PARRY the behavior is overt verbal behavior, while in DAYDREAMER
the behavior consists of both overt behavior and daydreams. PARRY’s strategy of blaming others in order to cope with shame-humiliation is similar to the
external attribution strategy of DAYDREAMER (which is used by nonparanoids
in rationalizing certain failures during daydreaming).

3.10.

PREVIOUS RELATED

3.10.3

WORK IN EMOTIONS

KG

Abelson’s Affect Taxonomy

Abelson (1981) proposes a model of affect in which affective responses occur
when two construals of a situation, derived from real events as well as imaginings, are incompatible. A variety of emotion terms from “relief” to “mortification” can be captured by this scheme.

3.10.4

Weiner’s

Causal

Attribution

Model

of Emotions

Weiner (1982) proposes a model of emotions based on the attributed causes
of a positive or negative outcome. He distinguishes three causal dimensions:
“locus of causality,” which refers to whether the outcome is perceived as caused
by self factors (such as intelligence, attractiveness, personality, and other self
attributes) or by environmental factors (such as help from others, the objective
difficulty of a task, and so on); “stability,” which refers to whether the causing
factor is perceived to be enduring (e.g., blindness is considered an enduring
factor whereas luck may not be); and “controllability,” which refers to whether
the outcome is perceived to have been controllable by the person deemed the
locus of causality. This scheme also captures a variety of emotion terms.

3.10.5

The Emotion

Model

of Bower

and Cohen

Bower and Cohen (1982) propose a model of emotional responses based on
“cognitive interpretation” (C-I) rules and “emotional interpretation” (E-I) rules.
The emotional state of the system is represented as a (fixed-length) vector of
emotion activation levels; each element corresponds to a type of emotion such as
“fear,” “anger,” “happiness,” “sadness,” “disgust,” and so on. The right-hand

side of an E-I rule specifies how each of these emotions is to be adjusted (or
not adjusted). For example, one E-I rule might state that if “someone acts in a
negative way and the factors causing the act are internal, stable, uncontrollable,”
then pity is incremented by 0.7 and anger is incremented by 0.2.
The emotion representation of Bower and Cohen (1982), unlike that of DAYDREAMER, assumes a fixed set of “primary” emotions (Izard, 1977; Tomkins,

1962, 1963). Emotions are not “typed” in DAYDREAMER

(except by the En-

glish generator)—this allows for the possibility that new types of emotions may
arise by virtue of being associated with new types of goals (or goals unique to
certain systems). In addition, multiple instances of the same type of emotion
may exist simultaneously in DAYDREAMER—for example, an anger emotion
directed toward one person and an anger emotion directed toward another person may be active at the same time. Our philosophy is that emotions should
be retained in their most specific form and that any emotional generalizations
should be performed by rules which make use of those emotions. Both schemes
enable the representation of mixed or conflicting emotions.

78

3.10.6

CHAPTER 3. EMOTIONS AND DAYDREAMING

Dyer’s BORIS

Affect Model

The representation of emotions in DAYDREAMER derives from the AFFECT
representations employed in the BORIS narrative comprehension program
(Dyer, 1983a). Using this scheme, a variety of words used to describe the
emotions of story characters may be represented.
The BORIS affect model is concerned with the reader’s abstract understanding of the emotional states of story characters rather than the modeling of emotions themselves and the influence on processing of being in certain emotional
states. However, in constructing DAYDREAMER, we have demonstrated that
the BORIS affect model is in fact applicable to such a problem.

3.10.7

Pfeifer’s FEELER

Pfeifer (1982) implemented a model of emotional behavior called FEELER.
FEELER performs simple goal-based processing;
the implementation of
FEELER consists of 27 production rules and a declarative representation of
the planning knowledge for taking a plane trip.
Emotions are generated in FEELER by interrupts and completion of a plan
or subplan. FEELER models the influence of emotions on behavior in the following ways: First, emotions prime memories emotionally congruent with those
emotions and thus increase the probability of the retrieval of those memories
through spreading activation (similar mechanisms have been proposed by Bower
& Cohen, 1982, and Clark & Isen, 1982). Second, certain production rules are
sensitive to emotional state. For example, one rule states that if one is angry
(at anyone) and someone makes a request to the self, anger is generated toward
that person. Another rule states that if one is angry at a person, the goal to
harm that person is activated (this rule is similar to the rule in DAYDREAMER
which activates the REVENGE daydreaming goal in response to anger).
Although emotions decay in FEELER, other factors lead to the sustenance of
both positive and negative emotions: First, when a memory emotionally congruent with the current, emotional state is retrieved, the emotions associated with

that episode are reactivated, and thus the existing emotional state is reinforced.
Second, certain rules (such as generating anger toward a person when already
angry at someone else) perpetuate emotional states. Pfeifer suggests that positive states may be maintained in the long run by having more rules for positive
emotions than for negative emotions. Unlike DAYDREAMER, FEELER has no
strategies (such as RATIONALIZATION and ROVING) for reducing negative
emotional states and maintaining positive emotional states. However, Pfeifer
does describe one unimplemented defense mechanism (A. Freud, 1937/1946)
which shifts anger into self-pity.
The control mechanism for selecting among multiple goals, planner, and
planning knowledge of FEELER is quite limited. In addition, FEELER does
not address the issues of daydreaming, creativity, and learning addressed in the

3.11.

WORK RELATED

TO DAYDREAMING

GOALS

79

present work. Nonetheless, FEELER is quite close in spirit to the emotion component of DAYDREAMER and the construction of DAYDREAMER has benefited
from this previous work.

3.11

Work

Related to Daydreaming

Goals

This section reviews previous work related to daydreaming goals and their activation by emotions.

3.11.1

Defense

“Defense mechanisms”

Mechanisms
(A. Freud, 1937/1946) are the unconscious processes

employed by the “ego” as a protection against dangerous “id” impulses. Defense
mechanisms either distort impulses before they enter consciousness or prevent
them from reaching consciousness altogether. It is hypothesized (A. Freud,

1937/1946; S. Freud, 1926/1936) that defense mechanisms are set in motion by
anxiety and serve to avoid or transform that anxiety.
Plutchik (1980) proposes a mapping from specific emotions to specific defense
mechanisms. For example, anger results in displacement which shifts the object
of the anger from a dangerous one to a less dangerous one, disgust with the self
results in projection which shifts blame to someone else, and sadness results in
sublimation or compensation for a loss.
The defense mechanism of rationalization was first introduced by Jones

(1908). This mechanism is not discussed by A. Freud (1937/1946) and is rarely
mentioned by S. Freud.
Defense mechanisms are similar to daydreaming goals in that both result
from emotions and in turn eliminate or modify those emotions. For example: ROVING
reduces a negative emotion by displacing negative thoughts from
consciousness and substituting more positive ones; this daydreaming goal thus
resembles repression and denial in that it prevents or defers dealing with these
negative thoughts. RATIONALIZATION reduces a negative emotion associated
- with a past failure through the generation of a rationalization daydream. REVERSAL reduces a negative emotion associated with an imagined future failure

through the generation of a realistic scenario in which that failure is avoided.
However, daydreaming goals are generally adaptive whereas defense mechanisms
are generally maladaptive.

3.11.2

McDougall’s Emotions and Instincts

McDougall (1923) proposes a correspondence between emotions and instincts
analogous to our relationship between emotions and daydreaming goals (except
that in his view the emotions accompany, rather than initiate, the corresponding
instinct). For example, fear corresponds to the instinct of escape, anger to the

CHAPTER 3. EMOTIONS AND DAYDREAMING

80

instinct of combat, disgust to the instinct of repulsion, lust to the instinct of
pairing, tender emotion to the parental instinct, and so on.

3.11.3

Festinger’s Reduction of Cognitive Dissonance

Festinger (1957) presents 12 methods for reducing cognitive dissonance which
we may view as rationalization strategies. Among them are: increasing the
desirability of a chosen alternative (similar to our hidden blessing strategy if
the “chosen” alternative is taken to be the goal outcome), decreasing the desirability of the unchosen alternative (similar to our mixed blessing strategy),
perceiving certain characteristics of the chosen and unchosen alternatives as
equivalent, decreasing the importance of aspects of the decision (similar to our
minimization), and rejecting those who disagree (which arises as a special case
of minimization). Although Festinger speaks of dissonance as being “psycho-

logically uncomfortable” (p. 3), cognitive dissonance reduction is considered
to be cognitively driven rather than emotion driven (unlike rationalization in
DAYDREAMER).

3.11.4

Abelson’s Simulation of Hot Cognition

Abelson (1963) implemented a program to produce rationalizations. The program simulates the cognitive processes of a person who is confronted with a
new proposition, either self-generated or taken as input. Propositions in the
program refer to a causal relationship between two elements: the “antecedent”
and the “consequent” of the proposition. Each element has an “evaluation”
associated with it which captures the degree to which that element is considered to be “good” or “bad.” A proposition is “balanced” if the evaluative signs
of the antecedent and consequent are the same. Otherwise the proposition is
“imbalanced.” When a new proposition is received, the program must decide
what to do with it. If the input proposition is balanced, it is simply added to
the program’s database of propositions. However, if the input proposition is
imbalanced, it is then subject to denial and rationalization.
The program attempts three rationalization strategies in sequence until a
successful rationalization is produced. The “Reinterpret final goal” strategy involves retrieving a proposition from the database whose antecedent is the same
as the consequent of the input proposition, and whose consequent’s evaluation
is greater in magnitude than, and opposite in sign to, that of the consequent
of the input proposition. That is, one may rationalize the fact that something
“good” results in something “bad” if it can be shown that the “bad” thing results in something more “good” than the “bad” thing is “bad.” This is similar
to rationalization by hidden blessing in DAYDREAMER, except that instead of
dynamically generating an arbitrary length imagined scenario of varying degrees
of realism, the process is limited in Abelson’s program to the application of one

3.11.

WORK RELATED

TO DAYDREAMING

GOALS

81

“inference,” which must already be instantiated in the database. The “Accidental by-product” and “Find the prime mover” strategies explain the imbalanced
proposition as an “accident” by retrieving a proposition from the database whose
antecedent’s evaluation had the same sign as that of the consequent of the input
proposition, and whose consequent is the same as the consequent of the input
proposition or the antecedent of the input proposition, respectively for each
strategy. These two strategies are similar to our rationalization by external
attribution. Again these processes are limited to a single “inference.”

3.11.5

Colby’s Neurosis Model

Colby (1963) implemented a computer model of neurosis which includes rationalization and 10 other defense mechanisms. The program contains a collection
of beliefs, expressed as subject-verb-object propositions. Each belief has associated with it a “charge” representing the degree of importance of that belief.
When a belief is “expressed” (produced as output), it loses most of its charge.
The system’s objective is to express its more charged beliefs, in order to reduce
the charge on those beliefs. However, a belief may be expressed directly only if it
is not in conflict with other “imperative” or “superego” beliefs about what is or
is not acceptable. For example, J ikke Debra might conflict with the imperative
belief I must not like movie stars. Unacceptable beliefs are only expressible once
they have been rendered acceptable by one of eight “transforms.” For example,
using the transform of “deflection,” I like Debra might be transformed into I
like Sarah.
Rationalization in the neurosis simulation refers to the justification of a
newly-created belief, while in DAYDREAMER it is defined as any process
whereby a situation may be rendered more emotionally acceptable. In both
systems, several strategies are used to produce rationalizations.
There are a number of similarities and differences between aspects of Colby’s
neurosis simulation and the process of rationalization in DAYDREAMER. In
both cases, defensive strategies render an undesirable belief more acceptable.
In the neurosis simulation the undesirable belief is one which violates a moral
‘or personal imperative, while in DAYDREAMER it is the belief that an important personal goal failure has occurred. Successful application of the defense
mechanism involves distortion of the unacceptable belief into an acceptable one
in the neurosis simulation, and reduction of the importance of the goal failure in DAYDREAMER. Emotional state is regulated upon successful defense in
both cases: In the neurosis simulation the danger level is brought under control
while in DAYDREAMER the strength of a negative emotion is brought below a
threshold.
In the neurosis simulation (Colby, 1963), unacceptable beliefs are taken to
be unavailable to conscious thought, while in DAYDREAMER, goal failures are
considered to enter into consciousness after which a conscious rationalization
process occurs. Thus different phenomena are being modeled: Colby seeks to

CHAPTER 3. EMOTIONS AND DAYDREAMING

82

explain the neurotic patient’s distorted beliefs and the anxieties which are of
unknown origin to the patient, while we seek here to explain the generation of
the conscious emotions and resulting daydreams of a normal person recalling or
experiencing a goal failure. Also, the defense mechanisms of Colby are highly
distortive, causing loss of information and the generation of incorrect information, whereas rationalization in DAYDREAMER is more of the flavor of subtle
reinterpretation. The mechanisms in Colby’s program are maladaptive, while
rationalization in DAYDREAMER is an adaptive mechanism (if not used in excess). Still, both investigations are relevant to each other since most defense
mechanisms may be applied both consciously and nonconsciously (see, for example, Plutchik, 1980) and there is a fine line between adaptive and maladaptive
coping strategies.
Colby notes that if a program simulating neurosis could be constructed,
various psychotherapeutic alternatives for removing maladaptive defense mechanisms or beliefs could be tested on the program itself in reduced time.
Suppes and H. Warren (1975) later formalized a collection of 44 or more
defensive transformations on propositions which are a generalization of Colby’s
transforms (not including his more complex mechanisms of isolation, denial, and
rationalization). However, they are concerned not with the modeling of cognitive
processes, but merely with the generation and classification of a large collection
of possible defense mechanisms starting from more basic transformations.

3.11.6

Janis and Mann’s Bolstering Strategies

Janis and Mann (1977) discuss six bolstering strategies which are related to
our plans for rationalization: exaggerating favorable consequences (related to
our rationalization by hidden blessing and mixed blessing), minimizing unfavorable consequences (related to our minimization, hidden blessing, and mixed
blessing), denying aversive feelings (related to our ROVING daydreaming goal),
exaggerating remoteness of action commitment, minimizing social surveillance
(similar to our minimization where the goal is social esteem), and minimizing
personal responsibility (similar to our rationalization by external attribution).

3.11.7

Summary

and Comparison of Strategies

The “emotion regulation” strategies of Festinger (1957), Abelson (1963), and
Janis and Mann (1977) are summarized and compared to strategies employed
in DAYDREAMER in Table 3.4. The correspondences, however, are only ap-

proximate. To our knowledge, only the strategies of Abelson (1963) have previously been implemented in a computer program. In this case, they are achieved
through the application of a single, literal inference rule; parameter substitution
is not performed, much less the generation of a daydream scenario.
The remaining strategy of Janis and Mann, exaggerating remoteness of action commitment, could be implemented in DAYDREAMER through the genera-

3.11.

WORK RELATED

TO DAYDREAMING

GOALS

83

teste
Hidden

Festinger || Increase

(1957)

desirability

importance,

of chosen
alternative
Reinterpret

of unchosen

Reject those

final goal

Janis &
Mann

(1977)

Decrease

desirability

Exaggerate
favorable
consequences

alternative

who disagree
Accidental
by-product,
Find prime
mover
Minimize
Minimize
Minimize
unfavorable
personal
social
| consequences | responsibility | surveillance

Deny
aversive
feelings

Table 3.4: Comparison of Emotion Regulation Strategies

tion of future daydreams involving various alternative actions. Some of the other
strategies of Festinger could be added, although they are really all just instances
of his more general principle of cognitive dissonance reduction. Also, some of the
remaining strategies involve external behavior rather than daydreams. Freudian
defense mechanisms such as those employed by Colby (not shown in the table)
could be added to a more pathological version of DAYDREAMER.

af nn

eral oA

aT

Pin ur

-_

‘Ob de

|

Civ

_

>

]

:

*(Jaltens
L

Aa

ay

<1

deed}

{

4

a

of

its
weit

ae a os
3)

aeeniice

a

pepne

’

Uaioe 5°= endlene

in

a Ba ae
bats)

at

"46

é

asad

Fra

twle,

atte

eT

¢

wwii

etl

eat eee sso whineoN
Weeee

.

ae

Saath

iaarany Tint Oe ee

Vue ji

whl

«coed

ee ore ayul-— a
> |ON Vries

>_>)bd NP

Ge

Mit OR

Shite aii neuvti inet ut fiat Seththf arrtarsCl

os Seay) toerey
*“i ee
eat, LBopt
oh -“
pes
Pah
514Oe
Uisi
an rare
n WT
@
farabel’
iv Gree
A ‘side
ek

;

oe
ares pootety
hy OY, we ti one Re abtlgelitt
8
- ich”
ai id
aT

7

Tew

en Sat

rt ay

§ ey

' ne Ye

ate hal rie:

! hij ig 5

Ke arte

'a

oe oS ikea

cana1a, ie roy

P

aa

s

_

+s

Sis-amic.

Sia

pus

Te
we

Shee

~

Year

—_

6

f

ee

——

=

nw

—

7

j

(

a>

«

7
ci

1

AYRE

j

‘wets

=n
al

¢

4

}

bry

a,

-

‘

7S

é

‘
A

i

——

7

(nih
a

j

th

'

-

wey

v= ») oor Gees
-

i

=

-_—=

t

a

TEN

vit

—

ery

|
omise |

bic

-

-

-

_

Piaeea

nap
}

=

ae

—

eWbih

es

SS

yi

1

¢

Me peeege

m=

+

hee yt se

keen
hn pet
ig
dopant
C Sait th
—

000

=

Chapter 4

Learning through
Daydreaming
Why do humans spend time daydreaming about hypothetical past and future
situations? There must be something that is gained. Humans must be retaining
or learning something in the process of daydreaming. Daydreaming should result
in similar benefits for computer programs: Instead of leaving a computer sitting
idle when it has no task to perform, it should be daydreaming in order to improve
the usefulness and efficiency of its future behavior.! Not every daydream need
be useful. In fact, even if only 10 percent (or less) of all generated daydreams
eventually prove to be of use, a daydreaming system still has an advantage over
systems which merely sit idle when unoccupied with tasks.
Previous researchers have addressed learning from real experiences
(Lebowitz, 1980; DeJong, 1981; Schank, 1982; Carbonell, 1983; Kolodner, 1984).
We address learning from imagined experiences or thought experiments: If a situation arises which is similar to one explored in a previous daydream, the program should be equipped to handle that situation better and more efficiently.
For example, when the program daydreams about alternative actions which
might have prevented a past failure, those actions may be recalled and applied
_in case a similar situation comes up. Similarly, if possible future situations and
responses to those situations are daydreamed and stored in memory, they may
be used if those situations should arise.
In this chapter, we address how DAYDREAMER learns—improves its future
1The idea of exploiting free processing time has been around in one form or another for
years. In an early version of the UNIX operating system, a lowest-priority background process applied any idle CPU time toward the task of calculating the first million digits of the
mathematical constant e (Ritchie & Thompson, 1974). The PARRY program (Colby, 1975),
a computer simulation of a paranoid patient, continued processing while waiting for the next
input of the psychiatrist by using its own output as input (K. M. Colby, personal communication, March, 1987).

85

86

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING

THROUGH DAYDREAMING

behavior—through the exploration of hypothetical situations. We consider: (a)
the generation of alternative past scenarios, (b) the generation of possible future
scenarios, (c) the use of such scenarios in improving future behavior, (d) the
formation and later recall of intentions to perform certain future actions.
First, we present the mechanisms of analogical planning and episodic memory which provide the basic framework for learning in DAYDREAMER. Second,
we explore what is meant by learning through daydreaming. Third, we discuss
several daydreaming goals which initiate and guide learning activity. Fourth,
we present strategies for daydream evaluation and selection—mechanisms for
decision-making in daydreaming. Fifth, we discuss mechanisms for the formation and recall of intentions. Finally, we review related previous work in artificial
intelligence.

4.1

Episodic Memory and Analogical Planning

In order for people to learn through daydreaming, this activity must somehow modify memory. Tulving (1972, 1983) proposed a distinction between two
types of human memory—episodic and semantic.?, Episodic memory contains
concrete, unique autobiographical memories, while semantic memory contains
abstract, generalized world knowledge. DAYDREAMER contains an episodic
memory which includes both real and imagined episodes. That is, daydreams
generated in the past are stored in episodic memory along with real experiences
(gained in performance mode or taken as input). In addition to personal experiences, “real” episodes include secondhand experiences which do not contain
DAYDREAMER as a character. Currently, secondhand experiences are added to
the program as hand-coded episodes. DAYDREAMER also contains a semantic
memory which consists of its collection of planning and inference rules.
Adding daydreams to episodic memory enables learning via the following
sequence: (a) a daydream—hypothetical past or future scenario of potential use
in the future—is first generated; (b) next, the daydream is evaluated and possibly stored in episodic memory; and (c) if the daydream is later retrieved from
episodic memory, it may then be applied in generating new internal or external
behavior.
What evidence is there that humans store daydreams in episodic memory’ Just as real experiences may be forgotten (Linton, 1982), so may daydreams (Smirnov, 1973). (Of course, it is possible that the experience still
exists somewhere in long-term memory and could be recalled if one were able
to find the right retrieval index.) Nonetheless, humans often do remember their
daydreams—sometimes in great detail: Subjects are able to recall and report
daydreams seconds after they occur (Klinger, 1978) and days, months, and
?Tulving (1972) introduced the term episodic memory; the term semantic memory had
been used previously by Quillian (1968). See Tulving (1983, pp. 18-21) for a review of the
history of the episodic-semantic distinction in psychology and philosophy.

4.1.

EPISODIC MEMORY AND ANALOGICAL PLANNING

87

years afterwards (J. L. Singer & Antrobus, 1963, 1972). Retrospective reports
of daydreaming are often quite elaborate (McNeil, 1981; Varendonck, 1921).
People sometimes confuse real and imaginary experiences (M. K. Johnson &
Raye, 1981). People frequently construct future plans (J. L. Singer, 1975) or
intentions (Lewin, 1926/1951) during daydreaming which are later carried out.
Varendonck (1921) reports near-complete recall of his daydreamed plans for
writing: “When I am composing letters I often afterwards write them almost
exactly as I worded them in my phantasy” (p. 327).
How are real experiences distinguished from daydreamed ones in episodic
memory? Very subtle memory modifications may occur during daydreaming:
Neisser’s (1982a) analysis of the testimony of John Dean shows that he often
remembered conversations in terms of his own fantasy about how those conversations should have been, rather than how they actually were. M. K. Johnson
and Raye (1981) propose that humans distinguish memories of real and imagined experiences based on differences in how those experiences are represented in
memory as well as through general reasoning processes. They hypothesize and
present empirical evidence that externally generated memories have a greater
amount of spatial and temporal contextual information, sensory attributes, and
semantic detail, while internally generated memories have associated with them
a greater amount of information about cognitive operations. In DAYDREAMER,
episodes are simply tagged as to whether they are real or imaginary.

4.1.1

Representation of Episodes

Real and imaginary episodes are represented as planning trees produced by the
planner. Figure 4.1 shows the planning tree for the REVENGE] (see page 4)
daydream. A planning tree consists of a tree of goals, with the root of the
tree (e.g., REVENGE) as the top-level goal, and remaining nodes (e.g., STAR,
MTRANS, VPROX, and so on) as various subgoals. Leaves of the tree (e.g.,
RTRUE, KNOW, and so on) are subgoals which did not require further planning
because their objectives were already satisfied in the world model or contezt.
_ RTRUE is an objective which is satisfied in any context. Actions are never
* leaves because all actions have preconditions in DAYDREAMER. Each nonleaf

goal (e.g., REVENGE) in the tree has a two-way connection to the rule (e.g.,
Revenge-Plan1) from which the division of that goal into subgoals was derived.
Recall from Chapter 2 that planning rules consist of an antecedent pattern
specifying a goal and a consequent pattern specifying one or more subgoals. A
planning rule is applicable to a given active goal if its antecedent unifies with
the objective of the goal. The objectives of the subgoals for the active goal are
then obtained by instantiating the consequent pattern of the planning rule with
the bindings obtained from the unification.
An episode is actually represented as an entire context, which includes the
planning tree as well as any states and inference chains not contained within
the planning tree.

THROUGH DAYDREAMING

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING

88

REVENGE (Harrison, LOVERS)
yeild

APHIS

MTRANS(Harrison,Me,GOAL-LOVERS)

GOAL (Harrison,LOVERS)

Revenge-Plan1
FAILED-GOAL (Harrison, LOVERS)

Failed-Rel-Goal-Plan1

Lovers-Theme-Plan

BELIEVE(Harrison,NOT-LOVERS)
ROMANTIC-INT(Harrison,Me)

M-BREAK-UP

BELIEVE(Harrison,STAR(Me))

RTRUE

GOAL(Harrison, LOVERS)
VPROX

BELIEVE(HarrisonNOT-GOAL-LOVERS-ME)

M-PHONE

MTRANS(Me,Harrison,NOT-GOAL-LOVERS)

KNOW

STAR(Me)

v

VPROX

M-STUDY(Me,ACTOR)

y

RTRUE

Figure 4.1: Planning Tree for REVENGE1

Episodes arise in three ways in DAYDREAMER: through generation of a
daydream, through participation in a performance mode experience (including
external input), and by manual entry of a hand-coded episode. In the program, daydreams, performance mode experiences, and hand-coded episodes are
all represented in the same fashion.

4.1.2

Storage of Episodes

The episodic memory of DAYDREAMER will contain many episodes. An episode
will be useful to the current situation when that episode contains a plan
for achieving a goal similar to one which is currently active. Thus in DAYDREAMER, a real or imagined episode ts indexed under the planning rule associated with the root goal of the episode. Since (a) an episode will be retrieved in

planning when its rule is selected, and (b) a rule is selected when the antecedent
of that rule unifies with (matches) the objective of an active subgoal, episodes
are effectively indexed under goal objective patterns.
Every single nonleaf subgoal in a planning tree becomes the root of an
episode. Thus a top-level planning tree actually becomes many episodes—one
for the top-level goal and one for each nonleaf proper descendant of the toplevel goal. Effectively, then, episodes are indexed under goal objective patterns
corresponding to each of the subgoals achieved in that episode.
Figure 4.2 shows a portion of an episodic memory consisting of REVENGE1

(see page 4), REVENGE?

(see page 91), and REVENGES

(see page 11). Each

4.1.

EPISODIC MEMORY AND ANALOGICAL PLANNING

89

Revenge-Plan1

EE

REVENGE1
EPISODE
CLeat ti,

q

REVENGE2
EPISODE
aaa ea

REVENGE3
EPISODE
a FAILED-GOAL(Harrison,LOVERS)

Mtrans-Plan2

REVENGE1.1
SUBEPISODE
GOAL(Harrison,LOVERS)

REVENGE1.2
SUBEPISODE

REVENGE1.3
SUBEPISODE

©MTRANS(Harrison,Me,GOAL-LOVERS)

REVENGE1.21
SUBEPISODE
eile

Figure 4.2: Indexing of Episodes by Rules

of these episodes is indexed under the Revenge-plan rule (and thus, in effect,
under the REVENGE goal which is the antecedent of that rule). The top-level
REVENGE goal is connected to three subgoals, which are the root goals of
three sub-episodes, REVENGE1.1, REVENGE1.2, and REVENGE1.3. These
sub-episodes are also indexed under rules; in the figure, only the index of
REVENGE1.2, Mtrans-plan2, is shown. The MTRANS subgoal in turn has
VPROX< as a subgoal, which is the root goal of the sub-episode REVENGE1.21.
The entire planning tree, not shown in the figure, is broken down into subepisodes in this fashion.
Other researchers have previously noted the importance of goals as memory
indices: Reiser (1983) argues that episodes are indexed under causally relevant
features; specifically, that episodes are indexed under goals and goal relation-

ships. Schank’s (1982) MOPs are indexed under goals.

4.1.3

Analogical Planning

Once imagined and real episodes are stored in episodic memory, how are they
later retrieved and applied in an appropriate situation? Episodes, whether imaginary or real, are employed in generating new daydreams or external behavior
through the process of analogical planning: An existing planning tree for achieving a particular goal, called the source goal, is used to guide the generation of
a planning tree for achieving a new goal, called the target goal.

When planning to achieve a given subgoal, planning rules are first found
which apply to that subgoal. A number of episodes are then retrieved using

90

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING

THROUGH DAYDREAMING
TARGET

SOURCE

Figure 4.3: Cases in Analogical Planning

those planning rules as indices.
application.

One or more

episodes are then selected for

The regular planning algorithm involves repeatedly selecting an active subgoal and sprouting plans—activating further subgoals—for that subgoal, with
each plan in its own separate context. When an episode is retrieved and selected,
the entire planning tree is not employed at once. Instead, the tree serves as a
suggestion to the planner about which planning rules to employ in sprouting
plans for active subgoals. The following cases, shown in Figure 4.3, may occur
during this process:
e Case 0: rule is applicable: A rule which was applicable to a subgoal in
the source situation is applicable in the target situation. Therefore, it is
applied.
Case 1: rule is inapplicable: A rule which was applicable to a subgoal in
the source situation is not be applicable in the target situation. Regular
planning must be invoked in order to achieve this subgoal.
Case 2: source tree bottoms out before target: In planning to achieve the
target goal, a subgoal which was satisfied in the source situation (and
is thus a leaf of the source episode) is not satisfied in the target situation. Regular planning must be invoked in order to construct a plan for
achieving this subgoal in the target situation.

Case 3: target tree bottoms out before source: A subgoal which required
planning in the source situation might already be satisfied in the target
situation. In this case, no further planning for this subgoal need be performed.
Portions of the source episode which do not apply to the current situation are
therefore automatically repaired in the course of planning.
Whenever regular planning is invoked above on a given subgoal, yet another
episode may be found applicable to that subgoal; that is, analogical planning

4.1.

EPISODIC MEMORY AND ANALOGICAL PLANNING

91

may be invoked recursively. As a result, a newly constructed episode may be
composed of multiple previous episodes and generic planning rules.
Once an episode for achieving a goal is found, alternative plans for achieving each subgoal—such as those specified by other generic planning rules or
episodes—are not employed since the purpose of employing the episode is to
reduce the search through such possibilities. Only when a suggested rule proves
inapplicable, or if the source episode bottoms out before the target episode, are
other possibilities considered.
Here are some specific examples of analogical planning in DAYDREAMER:
Since both imaginary and real episodes may be employed in generating both
imaginary and real episodes, there are four possibilities. We consider each in
turn.

First, a previous daydream may be employed in generating a new daydream.
For example, in LOVERS1, DAYDREAMER asks Harrison Ford out on a date
and he turns her down. DAYDREAMER then produces REVENGE1.
Later
when DAYDREAMER is turned down by another movie star, the following daydream is generated by analogy to REVENGE1:

REVENGE2
| remember the time | got even with Harrison Ford for turning me down
by studying to be an actor, being a star even more famous than he
is, him calling me up, him asking me out, and me turning him down.

| study to be an actor. | am a star even more famous than Robert
Redford is. He calls me up. He asks me out. | turn him down. | get
even with him for turning me down. | feel pleased.
In this case, no repairs or completions were necessary—the entire source episode,
as previously shown in Figure 4.1, was employed verbatim (after mapping Harrison Ford to Robert Redford) in the target episode, as shown in Figure 4.4.
P

In the daydream REVENGES (see page 11), however, repairs must be performed. As shown in Figure 4.5, the GOAL subgoal of the target episode cannot
be achieved by the Lovers-theme-plan rule of the source episode (as shown previously in Figure 4.1). Since this rule is inapplicable in the target situation, regular
planning is invoked to achieve this subgoal. The rule Employment-theme-plan
is applied to the subgoal, followed by further rules. Except for this subtree, the
remainder of the source episode is employed without further modification (other

than parameter substitution).
Second, a previous real episode may be employed in generating a new daydream. Suppose DAYDREAMER now wishes to get in touch with Harrison Ford

to try and ask him out again (just in case he changes his mind!). Hand-coded
episodes contain plans for finding out the movie star’s telephone number which
are recalled and employed through analogical planning in RECOVERY1 (see

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING

92

THROUGH DAYDREAMING

REVENGE (Robert, LOVERS)
Revenge-Plan1

FAILED-GOAL(Robert, LOVERS)

MTRANS(Robert,Me,GOAL-LOVERS)

GOAL(Robert, LOVERS)

Failed-Rel-Goal-Plan1

Lovers-Theme-Plan

GOAL (Robert, OVERS)

BELIEVE(Robert,NOT-LOVERS)

ie

BELIEVE(Robert,NOT- iyLOVERS-ME)

= M- te

MTRANS(Me, Robert, cele-LOVERS)

ROMANTIC-INT(Robert,Me)

M-BREAK-UP

BELIEVE(Robert,STAR(Me))

RTRUE

VPROX

KNOW

STAR(Me)

M-STUDY(Me,ACTOR)

y

RTRUE

Figure 4.4: Planning Tree for REVENGE2

REVENGE (Agatha, EMPL)
Revenge-Plan1

GOAL(Agatha,EMPL)

MTRANS (Agatha, Me,GOAL-EMPL)

j

:

FAILED-GOAL (Agatha, EMPL)

Failed-Rel-Goal-Plan1

POS-ATTITUDE(Agatha,EMPL)

Nepigeetlre tyi)
ii

BELIEVE (Agatha, coreg EMPL-ME)

; BELIEVE(Agatha,EXECUTIVE(Me))
RRR

eee

ene

wenn anne

nnn

Repaired portion

M- sya
KNOW

MTRANS(Me, Agatha, wih 4b
VPROX

Figure 4.5: Planning Tree for REVENGE3

4.1.

EPISODIC MEMORY AND ANALOGICAL

PLANNING

93

SOURCE HAND-CODED EPISODE

TARGET EPISODE (DAYDREAM)

KNOW(Ne,asia

RECOVERY

saeMe, TELNO(Rich))

MTRANS

kh

VPROX

meal TRW-File)

M-PHONE

KNOW(TRW-File it

M-risesTRW-Flle)

KNOW(Me, TELNO(Harrison))

MTRANS(Alex,Me, TELNO(Harrison))
KNOW(TRW-Flle, TELNO(Harrison))

WH

Wachee

M-LOGIN(Alex, TRW-File)

Figure 4.6: Analogical Planning in RECOVERY1
page 6). As shown in Figure 4.6, the source episode becomes a subtree of the

target episode (daydream).
The daydream RATIONALIZATIONI (see page 4) provides another example of a (hand-coded) real episode applied to the generation of a daydream—in
this case, however, only a small component of the daydream results from analogical application of the episode, as shown in Figure 4.7. The source episode
bottoms out at the RPROX subgoal, and so regular planning is employed in
order to expand this subgoal.
Third, a previous imaginary episode may be employed in generating a realworld (performance mode) episode. For example, consider the following daydream:

REHEARSALI1
| go to his house. We go to a restaurant. We eat dinner. We go to
the Fox International Theater. We watch a movie. We go to his house.
We kiss. ...

This daydream is employed through analogical planning in the following performance mode experience:

LOVERS3
External action:

I go to Vicente Foods.

94

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING

THROUGH DAYDREAMING

(Forward Other Planning)
ACTING-EMPL(Harrison,Paramount)

ACTING-EMPL(Harrison,Paramount)

RPROX(Harrison,Cairo)

RPROX(Harrison,Cairo)

y Perrrttteetetree

Pe

Soe

Figure 4.7: Partial Tree for RATIONALIZATION1

Input: A guy asks you what time it is.
What do you know!

External action: I tell him
him at a restaurant.

I would

like to have

dinner

with

Input: He tells me his address.

External action:

I buy groceries.

I go home.

External shared action: We go to a restaurant.
We go to his house. We kiss.

I eat.

We eat dinner.

Fourth, a previous real episode may be employed in generating another real
episode. For example, after the successful performance mode experience of
LOVERS3, DAYDREAMER could apply this episode by analogy the next time
it meets someone.
When the target situation is sufficiently different from the source situation,
nontrivial repairs will be made to the source episode. However, if previous
episodes are frequently employed in generating new daydreams without repair,
then the program will generate what is basically the same daydreain over and
over again. For example, REVENGE2 is a trivial variation on REVENGE1;
future similar experiences will give rise to yet more similar daydreams. There
are several ways in which DAYDREAMER attempts to cope with this problem

(even if recurrent daydreams do occur in humans [J. L. Singer, 1975, pp. 17-32]):

e Each episode associated with a given rule is moved to the end of the list
of episodes associated with the rule whenever it is employed in generating

4.1.

EPISODIC MEMORY AND ANALOGICAL

PLANNING

95

a daydream. When selecting episodes for application, episodes earlier in
the list are given priority over episodes later in the list.
e A collection of strategies for creativity, including serendipity, mutation,
and environmental input (discussed in Chapter 5), are employed to get the
program out of a rut by forcing it to generate or notice new possibilities.

Furthermore, if a daydream generated by analogy to a previous daydream is
stored again in episodic memory, there will be an even greater proliferation of
almost identical episodes. For this reason, a daydream is not stored in memory
if it was derived from a previous episode without any repairs. That is, a new
daydream is not stored if it is isomorphic to a previous episode—if it consists
of exactly the same tree of rules. Thus REVENGE? is not stored since it
was derived wholly from REVENGE1 without repairs; however, REVENGES is
stored since it was constructed through repair of REVENGE1. Whether or not
repairs are performed is monitored during planning, so that a graph comparison
does not have to be performed later on.

4.1.4

Issues for Theories of Episodic Memory

Any theory of episodic memory use must address the following questions:
e What information is provided by an episode which is not already available
as a result of having found the appropriate knowledge structure for accessing that episode? For example, suppose that episodes are represented

in terms of scripts (Schank & Abelson, 1977). Scripts may then be used
as memory structures for retrieval of an episode involving the same script
as the current situation. However, what is the use of retrieving such an
episode? Normally, one might wish to employ such an episode in making
predictions about the current situation. However, in order to retrieve the
episode, one must first determine what script the current situation is an
instance of; having done this, the retrieved episode provides no information not already contained in its script. The only reasonable response is
that episodes must somehow contain more information than is contained
in their indices. It is important to specify exactly what that information
is. Scripts were used as an example memory structure. In the offshoot
of scripts called MOPs (Schank, 1982), episodes are in fact indexed by
deviations of a scene of a script rather than by scripts themselves.

e What information is provided by the episode that is not available elsewhere’? For example, if episodes are merely combinations of existing rules
from semantic memory, what is gained by accessing the episode? If episode
events are fully explained in terms of existing rules, what new knowledge
do those events provide? For example, in the explanation-based generalization of Mitchell, Kellar, and Kedar-Cabelli (1986), both the training example and the justified generalization—that is, a generalization of

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING

96

THROUGH DAYDREAMING

the proof which demonstrates that the example is an instance of a given
concept—contain no information that is not derivable from the existing
concept definition and the domain theory. However, the justified generalization does satisfy a given criterion of operationality (Mostow, 1981)—
that the generalization be useful for recognizing examples of the concept
efficiently. The requirements that DAYDREAMER increase efficiency and
improve control in closed-system learning (as described in the next section)
are both examples of operationality criteria.
How do we address these questions in the case of DAYDREAMER? Episodes
indeed contain more information than is contained in their indices. In particular,
episodes consist of instantiated planning trees enabling search to be reduced.
Indices are a heuristic for relevance in DAYDREAMER. Episodes are retrieved
when their indices are currently active. Once an episode is retrieved, it may be
discarded based on evaluations of realism and desirability associated with the
episode (discussed later in the chapter). If not, the episode will be applied in
planning and it may or may not prove useful.
The representation of episodes in DAYDREAMER is based to a large extent
on semantic memory—episodes are represented as planning trees which refer
to generic rules, which are in turn part of semantic memory. In Figure 4.2,
for example, the rules Revenge-planl and Mtrans-plan2 are part of semantic
memory and the remainder is part of episodic memory.
In addition, however, some episodes contain information that is not present
elsewhere in any form, that has no basis in terms of other knowledge. That is,
episodes may contain causal relationships—inaccessible episodic rules—that are
unknown outside that episode, and are thus not considered a part of semantic

memory.

4.2

Definition of Learning

What does it mean for DAYDREAMER to learn through daydreaming—a process
carried out without interaction with the external world? There is a potential
problem in claiming that a closed system is able to learn: Any desired state of
the system (including processes and data) given the initial state of the system
is reachable whether or not the system has “learned”—that is, reached some
intermediate state between the initial and desired states. In other words, if you
can learn something without external input, then you must really already know
it.
First of all, DAYDREAMER is not a closed system. In fact, it accepts the
following sources of input which contribute to learning:

e Input of events and states in performance mode: This enables the program to gain new experiences automatically through interaction with the
external environment. External input is an important source of feedback

4.2.

DEFINITION OF LEARNING

in learning:

97

Daydreamed plans may be modified if they do not succeed

when tested in the real world.®

e Input of hand-coded episodes: Normally, hand-coded episodes are loaded
when the program is started.
However, there is no reason why such
episodes cannot be added later. This is not a particularly interesting form
of learning since it is not carried out automatically. Hand-coded episodes
are all loaded during program initialization in the current version of DAYDREAMER. However, we might eventually wish to compare the behavior
of DAYDREAMER given different initial sets of hand-coded episodes, or
given new hand-coded episodes after the program has been running for a

while. RECOVERY1 (see page 6) is an example of a daydream generated
through the application of a hand-coded episode.

e Input of random physical objects: This input is used to stir up a stagnant closed system by producing remindings (see Chapter 5). Examples are provided by the daydreams COMPUTER-SERENDIPITY and

LAMPSHADE-SERENDIPITY

(see page 14).

However, since the majority of the learning carried out by DAYDREAMER
does not require external input, we must examine in detail what is meant by
closed-system learning. Closed-system daydreaming modifies the state of the
system in three ways which contribute to learning:
e Episode storage: Daydreams are stored in episodic memory for later recall.
A recalled daydream is then employed through the process of analogical
planning in generating new daydreams or external behavior.
e Rule creation: Inference and planning rules are constructed and saved for
possible future use. In particular, new preservation goal inference and
planning rules are derived by the REVERSAL daydreaming goal.
e Partial concern completion: A concern is activated, planned up to a point,
and then halted until an appropriate time in the future. Such a concern is
primed to employ fortuitous subgoal successes or serendipities which may
occur later on.

In this section, we concentrate on the problem of what is meant by learning
in the case of stored episodes, leaving a discussion of rule creation and partial
concern completion to later sections in this chapter.
3DAYDREAMER also includes a simple mechanism for inducing new planning rules from a
sequence of two input states assumed to form a causal chain; this is accomplished through variabilization (converting constants into variables). Although a potentially general mechanism,
it is currently employed only in the specific situation of RECOVERY3 (see page 13).

98

4.2.1

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING

Episodes for Improvement

THROUGH DAYDREAMING

of Future Search

Many daydreams stored as episodes are simply collections of existing generic
rules. What new information, then, does such an episode contribute? What has
actually been learned through storage of the episode?
In generating a plan to achieve a given goal, the goal is broken down into
subgoals, which in turn are further broken into subgvals, and so on. Multiple ways of breaking down each subgoal lead to alternative plans, which are
evaluated according to their positive and negative consequences (i.e., personal
goal successes and failures). If there are several ways of breaking down each
subgoal, the search for a good solution can grow large—a combinatorial explosion results. After spending much time searching to solve a problem once, a
traditional planner will start from scratch in solving a similar or identical problem. This is wasted effort; a planner should be able to generate a solution more
quickly the second time. A person solving a problem similar to a previous one
would probably recall the previous solution which would then enable the person
to solve the new problem more easily. In DAYDREAMER, the analogical planning mechanism enables recall of a previous real or imagined planning episode
which is then adapted to a new goal. Parts of the adapted plan may need to be
repaired for the new goal, which is not identical to the previous one. Even so,
much of the adapted plan may stand untouched.
Thus, episodes enable learning by reducing future search in planning.
Episodes are a source of knowledge for choosing among alternative plans for
achieving a subgoal—in solving a problem, for each subgoal, the plan that
worked best in a similar previously considered situation is chosen. That. is,
daydreaming evaluates the consequences of alternative future plans of action,
storing the best plans for possible future use. If the program can perform search
in advance through daydreaming, search in the future will be reduced—provided
that the program is good at anticipating future problems and in detecting when
a problem is similar to a previously examined one. In the terminology of Bundy,
Silver, and Plummer (1985), episodes repair control faults.
Thus learning in a closed daydreaming system may be defined as follows:
If a program is able to solve a given problem more quickly after daydreaming,
the program may be sazd to have learned from that daydreaming. Alternatively,
we may say that if, after daydreaming, a program is able to generate a better
solution to a problem given a limited amount of time, the program has learned
from that daydreaming.
This form of learning is important because time constraints are imposed in
most real-world situations: For example, quick responses are expected in human conversation. Whereas in daydreaming mode the program generates many
possible plans, both fanciful and realistic, in performance. mode the program
ummediately retrieves and employs the best previously daydreamed plan for the
current situation. Thus learning enables the program to generate better solutions when there is no time for daydreaming in performance mode.

4.2.

DEFINITION OF LEARNING

99

Given its initial collection of rules and episodes, DAYDREAMER may not
always be able to achieve its personal goals in performance mode; for example,
it fails in LOVERS, its first attempt to achieve a LOVERS goal. If the program
learns, it may then be able to achieve a personal goal which it was previously
unable to achieve. Learning also enables the program to improve at achieving its
personal goals. Furthermore, learning enables the program to retain the ability
to achieve its personal goals in the face of a changing environment.
Thus, learning 1s demonstrated when, given one performance mode experience in which the program produces a certain behavior and fails, the program
is later given a similar experience in response to which the program produces a
different behavior and succeeds.
Closed-system learning, then, enables the program to survive—achieve its
personal goals in the simulated real world. Evolution may thus be considered a form of closed-system learning at the species level. However, unlike the
process of evolution, learning in DAYDREAMER is not accomplished through
random mutation and natural selection; rather, DAYDREAMER already has
heuristics which direct it toward a fruitful evolution. (See, however, Lenat’s,
1983, hypothesis that evolution of higher animals and plants is not accomplished
through random mutation and natural selection, but through plausible mutation and testing—that is, that mutation is directed by heuristic rules contained
within DNA which, for example, coordinate simultaneous genetic mutations in

an advantageous manner.)
The value of spinning a daydream lies partially in the fact that its value
is not always readily apparent. Only by considering many possibly irrelevant,
absurd, or unrealistic possibilities—which may take much time—are the benefits
of daydreaming achieved. In a real-world situation, it may never occur to a
person to try to find an overlooked possibility because it might not be apparent
that such a possibility exists, and the person may never know for lack of time to
go into a daydream to find out. However, in a particularly difficult situation in
which all apparent alternatives have negative consequences, it may in fact pay
to step back for a while and daydream.
The following additional benefit is provided by episodes: Episodes enable
reduction of search through the filling in of details (such as persons, animals,
locations, and so on) of a daydream. For example, in generating an imaginary
sequence of events taking place in a familiar grocery store, details such as the
location of the aisles, vegetable section, and check-out lanes may be filled in
based on a memory of that grocery store. In particular, planning rules leave
certain entities (such as physical objects or locations) unspecified—this situation
occurs when a rule consequent contains variables not present in the antecedent.
Normally, general planning is required to find appropriate instances of these
entities. However, if this planning has been performed once, it may not have
to be performed a second time: Entities may be instantiated based on entities
contained in a recalled episode. An example of this occurs in RATIONALIZATION1 (although in this case the episode was hand-coded rather than generated

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING

100

THROUGH DAYDREAMING

through prior daydreaming): The recalled episode of Harrison Ford having a job
contains the location of his job (Egypt) which is then employed in the current
daydream. Another example is RECOVERY1.
The application of previous episodes in daydreaming is also useful to further learning, since past experiences are often a predictor of future experiences.
Specifically, (a) episodes provide initial daydream scenarios (for example, “what
if there is an earthquake?”) and (b) episodes provide continuations of existing
daydream scenarios (for example, “what if there is an earthquake while I am on

a date?”).

4.2.2

Episodes for Changing Knowledge Accessibility

If the possibilities inherent in a closed system are sufficiently numerous, that
system can effectively be considered as a nonclosed system. In fact, if one
draws the boundaries big enough, the distinction between closed and non-closed
systems breaks down: Everything is a closed system. The important problem
then becomes one of control: How and when are knowledge elements accessed,
out of all those contained in the program? Although a program may zn principle
contain the knowledge necessary to generate a given plan in a given situation, the
control algorithm may be such that access to that knowledge is unlikely or even
impossible in that situation. For example, as mentioned above, in performance
mode only the plan with the highest evaluation at a given point is selected;
Other plans are simply not explored. Closed-system learning therefore involves
restructuring of knowledge so that access to it is possible in new situations.

DAYDREAMER restructures knowledge through (a) the storage of episodes, (b)
creation of new rules, and (c) partial processing of a concern. A particular kind
of knowledge restructuring which can occur through episode storage is discussed
in this section.
Rules in DAYDREAMER are divided into two classes—generic and episodic.
Episodic rules are similar to generic rules, except that they are inaccessible to
regular planning. A given episodic rule may only be accessed through analogical
application of an episode which contains that rule. That is, an episodic rule may
only be applied if an episode containing it is recalled.
Episodic planning rules are initially contained within, and can only be applied through retrieval of, hand-coded episodes. However, if a daydream is
generated which employs episodic rules borrowed from a hand-coded episode,
the storage of this daydream may enable those rules to become accessible in
new situations. In short, generation and storage of a daydream may make a
previously inaccessible episodic rule accessible. In other words, in a certain situation, although the hand-coded episode may not be recalled, the new daydream
27s recalled, and an episodic rule previously inaccessible in this situation is now

accessible through this daydream.*

4If an episodic rule is employed often enough, does it become a generic rule?

Although

4.2.

DEFINITION OF LEARNING

101

HAND-CODED EPISODE

DAYDREAM

INDEXED UNDER:
COMPUTER, CASH,

INDEXED
ee

Acquainted-Plan

REHEARSAL-LOVERS

ACQUAINTED

iis

ape

wraans-acdtoras.e
inace

PEN

MTRANS

ACOUAWTED

MTRANS

DAT-SERV-MBR

a

uhNohane
ROMANTIC-INT

M-AGREE

GOAL

M-CONVERSATION

DAT-SERV-MBR

Ke

*

“ies

MTRANS-ACCEPTABLE

ATRANS

i4
DAT-SERV-MBR

Dee

MTRANS

ANS

—DAT-SRV-MBR

ATRANS
AT

AT

‘a
PTRANS

‘’

KNOW

Figure 4.8: Making Inaccessible Rules Accessible

An example of this is provided by COMPUTER-SERENDIPITY (see
page 14). As shown in Figure 4.8, a hand-coded episode containing two other-

wise inaccessible episodic rules is retrieved through the conjunction of (a) the
index of computer provided as environmental object input, and (b) serendipity
with a active REHEARSAL concern for a LOVERS goal. A new daydream involving achievement of the LOVERS goal is then generated by analogy to this
episode. The hand-coded episode is normally not retrievable, since it requires
two or more of its indices to be active; thus the episodic rules it contains would
normally not be accessed. However, these rules are now contained in the new
daydream, which may be retrieved any time a LOVERS goal is pursued in the
future.

4.2.3.

Survival and Growth

Goals in humans are ultimately directed toward survival of the person, growth

(Maslow, 1954) of the person (e.g., toward self-actualization), and survival of
the species.

Goals are thus tuned so that if they are continually satisfied the

person tends to survive, grow, and reproduce. Thus personal goals—the cognitive representation of needs—should correspond to the true physiological and
such a change of status is not performed explicitly in the current version of DAYDREAMER,
an episodic rule may be contained in so many diverse episodes that it is effectively accessible
in all situations.

102

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING

THROUGH DAYDREAMING

psychological needs of the person. In humans, it is clear that oxygen, water,
and food are necessary for survival. However, the definition of survival in the
case of a computer program such as DAYDREAMER is not as clear.
In computer science terms, survival must refer to the ability of a system to
perform its designated tasks. The designated tasks in DAYDREAMER are specified by its personal goals: forming and maintaining interpersonal relationships,
keeping a job, and so on. Therefore, in DAYDREAMER, survival is defined as the
ability to achieve, and continue to achieve, personal goals, while growth refers
to the ability to improve at achieving personal goals over time, that is, to learn.
The performance mode of DAYDREAMER enables us to evaluate the program’s success in achieving its personal goals given various external situations
as input. Specifically, the success or failure of a personal goal is assessed according to whether, in performance mode, the system carries out certain actions, or
receives certain actions or states as input, which are designated to achieve that
goal. For example, ENTERTAINMENT is satisfied only if the system performs
certain actions designated as having entertainment value (such as watching a
movie). The MONEY goal is satisfied only if money is “given” to the system
(via external input). The success or failure of a LOVERS, FRIENDS, or EMPLOYMENT goal is also dependent upon external input, for example, he dumps
me, she offers me the job, and so on. The success of the SELF-ESTEEM and
SOCIAL ESTEEM goals is generally assessed as a function of the success of each
of the other goals. Thus there are objective criteria for the success and failure
of personal goals.
However, since these criteria refer in part to external input, there is a potential problem: A human could consistently defeat the computer by typing in
negative responses. We therefore assume that the responses typed in are those
of a “reasonable” person, that the responses present to the system a plausible
external world, one which the system might encounter were it a human and not
a computer system (since, after all, humans do not usually form true friendships
with computers!). The “reasonableness” of the input responses can be varied in
order to evaluate how the system is able to cope with different environments.
The criteria for the success and failure of personal goals are contained within
DAYDREAMER in the form of inferences and planning rules, some of which were
discussed above (and others of which will be presented in the remainder of this
chapter). Thus the success or failure of a given goal may be assessed simply
by examining the appropriate data structure within DAYDREAMER. This, of
course, assumes that the system does not cheat (for example, by altering its

MONEY

data structure to indicate a million dollars).

The DAYDREAMER

program is constructed in such a way that it does not generally cheat in this
manner.
However, in certain cases DAYDREAMER does deceive itself: For
example, through the RATIONALIZATION daydreaming goal, the degree to
which a goal is considered to have failed is reduced in order to reduce the
negative impact on processing caused by the negative emotional state resulting
from that failed goal. Thus RATIONALIZATION temporarily tricks the system

4.3.

DAYDREAMING

GOALS FOR LEARNING

103

into thinking its situation is not as bad as it actually is, so that it can get
on with the business of actually improving its situation: RATIONALIZATION
brings optimism to the system.
If employed to an excessive degree, such strategies can have disastrous effects:
By daydreaming away all of its unsatisfied goals, the system would never achieve
them in reality. A system which fools itself in this way cannot continue to
function for long—although it may lead a blissful existence during its last few
moments.

4.3

Daydreaming

Goals for Learning

General, abstract planning for future tasks is impossible because of the combinatorial explosion of possible future tasks and world situations. Therefore,
daydreaming goals are used to guide the exploration of concrete situations of
potential use in the future. In this section, we discuss REVERSAL, RECOVERY,

REHEARSAL,

4.3.1

Reversal

and REPERCUSSIONS.

The REVERSAL daydreaming goal generates scenarios in which a past real failure is avoided or a future imagined failure is prevented.° This goal is activated
in response to a negative emotion of sufficient strength resulting from a real or
imagined personal goal failure:
IF

THEN

NEG-EMOTION resulting from a FAILED-GOAL
ACTIVE-GOAL for REVERSAL of failure

The REVERSAL daydreaming goal modifies memory in two ways (depending
on which of several strategies for REVERSAL is employed): episodes in which
the personal goal failure is avoided are stored in episodic memory, and new
inference and planning rules are created and stored in semantic memory. Both
memory modifications modify future behavior of the program: Episodes are
recalled and applied in order to achieve similar future goals, and rules are applied
directly.

The experience LOVERSI (see page 3), in which DAYDREAMER is turned
down by Harrison Ford, contains two failures: the failure of a SOCIAL ESTEEM preservation goal and the failure of a LOVERS goal.® In the daydream
5It is also possible to daydream about alternative actions which might have prevented a goal
success and resulted in a failure. We ignore these daydreams in the present DAYDREAMER
for simplicity. Nonetheless, assessing the reasons for success is just as important as assessing

the reasons for failure—both enable learning (Heider, 1958, pp. 88-89). Daydreaming of ways
success might have been prevented is another way of generating imagined failures for further

learning. That is, one may assess how one might have failed in a past experience in order to
plan to avoid such possible mistakes in the future.
6]t also happens to be the case that the SOCIAL ESTEEM goal is a subgoal of the
LOVERS goal.

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING

104

THROUGH DAYDREAMING

REVERSAL] (see page 9), a REVERSAL of the SOCIAL ESTEEM goal leads
to success of the LOVERS goal: DAYDREAMER imagines having worn nicer
clothes. When DAYDREAMER is later confronted with a similar situation in
LOVERS2 (see page 9), she puts on nicer clothes.
Here are some other daydreams involving REVERSAL of the LOVERS goal:

REVERSAL2
| feel upset. What if | had told him | found out his girlfriend was
cheating on him? He would have broken up with his girlfriend. | would
have asked him out. He would have accepted. | feel regretful.

REVERSAL3
What if| had told him | liked his movies? He would have had a positive
attitude toward me.
| would have asked him out. He would have
accepted. | feel regretful.
The value of the REVERSAL daydreaming goal arises from the rule of thumb
that if something has happened once, it may happen again (or if something is
imagined, it is possible that it may happen in reality). This is especially true in
a program such as DAYDREAMER which is perpetually concerned with a fixed

set of personal goals.
REVERSAL is accomplished in different ways depending upon what caused
the personal goal failure: If the personal goal failure was generated through an
inference, or chain or inferences, as in REVERSAL1, the UNDO-CAUSES strategy is employed. Ifthe personal goal failure resulted from failure of other persons

to behave in the manner necessary for achievement of that goal, the strategies

of EXPAND-LEAVES, used in REVERSAL2, and EXPAND-ALTERNATIVES,
used in REVERSAL3, are employed. Other possibilities are not handled by
REVERSAL. We now discuss each strategy in turn.
The UNDO-CAUSES strategy applies to the failure of a personal goal which
was generated by an inference rule. For example, failure of SOCIAL ESTEEM
results from a chain of inferences while planning for LOVERS in LOVERSI1, as
shown in Figure 4.9. This strategy may only be applied if one of the leaves (ultimate sources), call it N, of the inference chain leading to the goal failure is the
negation of some state. (In the two-valued logic of DAYDREAMER contexts—see
Chapter 7 for details—the absence of the assertion of a given fact is equivalent
to the assertion of the negation of that fact—the closed-world assumption.) In
this case, there exists such an N:

(NOT (WELL-DRESSED Me))
If the negation of N is deemed

RPROX

a long-term state, examples of which are

(city of residence) and INSURED

(having insurance), a new top-level

4.3.

DAYDREAMING

GOALS FOR LEARNING

105

PTRANS(Me,Home, Nuart)
At-Plan
AT(Harrison,Nuart)

MTRANS(Me,Harrison)

AT(Me,Nuart)

NOT(WELL-DRESSED(Me))
Neg-Attitude-Inf

RICH(Harrison)
NEG-ATTITUDE(Harison,Me)

ROMANTIC-INTEREST(Me,Harrison)
Social-Esteem-Failure

FAILED-GOAL(Me,POS-ATTITUDE(Harrison,Me))

Figure 4.9: Inference Chain for a Social Regard Failure

personal goal whose objective is the negation of N is created and activated. This
enables DAYDREAMER to prevent future similar failures once and for all.
Otherwise, if the negation of N is not a long-term state (as is the case for

WELL-DRESSED),

the UNDO-CAUSES

strategy creates (a) a new inference

rule which activates a preservation goal in appropriate circumstances, and (b)
a new planning rule for achieving that preservation goal. The new preservation
goal should be activated whenever it is possible that the personal goal may fail
in the near future (for example, when DAYDREAMER has an active goal to

MTRANS

to a RICH person toward whom she has ROMANTIC-INTEREST).

Planning for this preservation goal should then attempt to prevent N (in our

example, not being WELL-DRESSED)
WELL-DRESSED).

or to achieve the negation of N (being

Specifically, the antecedent of the new inference rule is given by the following:
for each variabilized’ version VL of all the leaves besides N, either VL is true or
a goal whose objective is VL is active. The consequent of the new inference rule
is to create a new preservation goal with some unique identifier. The antecedent
of the new planning rule is a preservation goal with the same unique identifier
as above. The consequent is a variabilized version of the negation of N.
In REVERSALI,
new rules:

the UNDO-CAUSES

strategy creates the following two

7The operation of variabilization converts constants, such as persons and physical objects,
into variables which can unify with (match) any instance of the major type from which they
were derived.

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING

106

THROUGH DAYDREAMING

person is RICH or ACTIVE-GOAL for person
to be RICH and
person is AT location or ACTIVE-GOAL for
person to be AT location and
self PTRANS to location or ACTIVE-GOAL for
self to PTRANS to location and
self MTRANS to person or ACTIVE-GOAL for
self to MTRANS to person and
ROMANTIC-INTEREST toward person or ACTIVE-GOAL
for ROMANTIC-INTEREST toward person
ACTIVE-GOAL PRESERVATION UID.1
IF
THEN

ACTIVE-GOAL
ACTIVE-GOAL

PRESERVATION UID.1
for self to beWELL-DRESSED

After these rules are added, the past failure episode is then replanned on behalf
of the REVERSAL daydreaming goal starting from an appropriate context. This
results in a REVERSAL scenario—REVERSALI in this case. These rules are
then later employed in the performance mode experience LOVERS2.
Within a concern, planning for a preservation goal has priority over planning
for nonpreservation goals. Thus any actions necessary to achieve preservation
goals will be taken before further planning for regular goals is performed.
The remaining strategies for REVERSAL operate if the personal goal failure
was caused by the failure of another person to perform actions necessary to
achieve that goal; thus these strategies may be employed only on goal failures
which result in performance mode. Performance mode experiences provide important feedback information which would otherwise be unavailable: whether
a given plan worked or did not work when applied in the external world. Although one may not know exactly why a given plan failed, one may follow the
strategy of continuing to use a plan which seemed to work or, if the plan did
not seem to work, attempting to use a different plan. Both EXPAND-LEAVES
and EXPAND-ALTERNATIVES are instances of such a strategy.
The EXPAND-LEAVES strategy for REVERSAL finds succeeded leaf subgoals whose realism is below a certain threshold and reinitiates planning for

those subgoals (on behalf of the current REVERSAL daydreaming goal). A leaf
subgoal is one for which no further planning was performed because it was considered satisfied at the time of planning. In REVERSAL2, the subgoal that the
movie star is NOT in a LOVERS relationship with another woman is replanned.
The EXPAND-ALTERNATIVES strategy for REVERSAL finds unexplored
branch contexts (if any) generated in planning for the personal goal and reinitiating planning in those contexts (on behalf of the current REVERSAL daydreaming goal). REVERSAL3 demonstrates the use of an alternative plan for
getting the movie star to have a POS-ATTITUDE toward the daydreamer.
Both of these strategies may make use of information provided as input
which justifies the action of the person which resulted in the personal goal
failure. For example, Harrison Ford may explain that he does cannot go out
with DAYDREAMER. because he has a girlfriend. Such input may be used

4.3.

DAYDREAMING

GOALS FOR LEARNING

107

to reduce the search: In expanding leaves, only those leaf subgoals stated as
reasons for the external action need be considered. In expanding alternatives,
only alternative plans for subgoals stated as reasons for the external action need
be considered.
What is the emotional impact of the REVERSAL daydreaming goal? First
we consider daydreams resulting from a real goal failure: An imagined past
goal success resulting from an alternative action leads to a negative, rather
than positive, emotion: regret. This occurs in each of the example daydreams
above. Thus successful REVERSAL actually has a negative emotional impact—
emotional state is sacrificed for the benefit of learning. If, instead, an imagined
goal failure results from alternative actions, positive emotions of relief result.
Thus in a situation in which there simply was no way of avoiding the past failure,
REVERSAL functions as a form of rationalization—the negative emotional state
associated with a past failure is reduced. In the case of imagined goal failures
which result in emotions of worry, successful REVERSAL (generating means
by which the imagined failure may be avoided and a success achieved) results
in positive emotions, which reduce the original level of worry. However, unsuccessful attempts resulting in further imagined failures produce further worry
emotions.

4.3.2

Rehearsal and Recovery

The purpose of the REHEARSAL and RECOVERY daydreaming goals is
twofold: to discover problems in a future plan before it is actually carried out
in performance mode, and to construct a plan in advance in order to improve
efficiency. REHEARSAL is activated in response to a halted personal goal concern:
subgoal to WAIT and
corresponding top-level goal contains no
variables and
POS-EMOTION of sufficient strength connected
to top-level goal

ACTIVE-GOAL

for REHEARSAL

of top-level goal

All personal goal concerns are halted just before they are about to perform
an action and the program is in daydreaming mode. This insures that the
program will get a chance to daydream about future tasks before performing
them.
REHEARSAL involves considering possible future completions of a concern
and incorporating these plans into episodic memory for future use by that concern. For example, before the date in LOVERS3, DAYDREAMER daydreams
about the date in REHEARSALI.
REHEARSAL may lead to an imagined personal goal failure, which then
activates a REVERSAL daydreaming goal, which in turn determines how to

avoid that failure. The daydream NEWSPAPER

(see page 7) is an example.

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING

108

THROUGH DAYDREAMING

RECOVERY is activated in response to a negative emotion
strength resulting from a personal goal failure:
IF
THEN

of sufficient

NEG-EMOTION resulting from a FAILED-GOAL
ACTIVE-GOAL for RECOVERY of failure

RECOVERY involves the generation of future scenarios for achieving the
same goal which failed.
What is the emotional impact of REHEARSAL and RECOVERY? An imagined goal success in a future daydream results in the positive emotion of hope.
Thus REHEARSAL and RECOVERY can serve to counteract negative emotions
resulting from previous imagined failures. By telling oneself that one promises
to achieve a goal, or that a goal will eventually be achieved, one tends to feel
better (even if that goal is never in fact achieved or planned for—though this
may lead to later problems). This is expressed in the proverb “pain is forgotten
where gain follows.” Rapaport (1951) also noticed the emotional value of future
daydreaming: “Daydreams often succeed in allaying, at least temporarily, the
fears and urgings with which they deal. Their work of planning—by experimenting with possible solutions—seems to succeed at times in ‘binding’ mobile
cathexes” (p. 463). Of course, an imagined goal failure in a future daydream
results in the negative emotion of worry, which in turn activates a REVERSAL
daydreaming goal to cope with that worry and prevent the imagined goal failure.

4.3.3

Repercussions

The REPERCUSSIONS daydreaming goal involves exploring the consequences
of a hypothetical future situation. In particular, if an important goal failure or

success occurs for another person (or animal), a REPERCUSSIONS daydreaming goal is activated to consider what it would be like for that failure or success
to occur to the daydreamer. If a hypothetical future situation leads to a personal goal failure, the REVERSAL daydreaming goal will be activated to find
ways to avoid such a future failure.

In the daydream REPERCUSSIONS1

(see page 8), a REPERCUSSIONS

daydreaming goal is first activated which causes an earthquake in Los Angeles to be hypothesized. Rules fire which infer the collapse of the apartment
and thus the failure of goals to stay alive and preserve possessions. These failures then result in the activation of two REVERSAL daydreaming goals. The
first goal applies the UNDO-CAUSES strategy which creates rules causing DAYDREAMER to go underneath a doorway whenever an earthquake begins in the
future (in the same city in which she lives). The second REVERSAL results
in the activation of a new top-level personal goal: to get insurance in order to
preserve her possessions. DAYDREAMER then tests the rules created in the
first REVERSAL by generating another alternative scenario. This time, rules
fire which infer a falling plant (hung above the doorway) and the failure of a
goal not to be hurt. This in turn activates another REVERSAL goal which

4.4.

EVALUATION AND DECISION MAKING

109

initiates a new top-level goal to move the plant. The two top-level goals are
later pursued in performance mode: DAYDREAMER moves the plant, and goes
to the insurance company and purchases the insurance. Although it may be
obvious that one can get hurt in an earthquake, it may not be obvious to watch
out for a falling plant. Thus only through such a daydream is one able to learn
to watch out for a falling plant in case of an earthquake.

4.4

Evaluation and Decision Making

In previous sections we have described how daydreams are produced, stored,
and later recalled and applied through analogical planning in a new situation.
This section addresses the issues of daydream evaluation and selection: After
generating a multitude of daydream scenarios, how does DAYDREAMER decide
which scenario to pursue in the future? How is such a decision fixed in memory? Might the program consider several alternative scenarios and not make
a final decision among them? How are choices made among several previously
daydreamed courses of action applicable in the current situation? When does
DAYDREAMER abandon a daydream or back up and modify it because it is not
turning out as desired? What different ways may daydreams be evaluated?

4.4.1

Daydream Evaluation Metrics

Humans often decide to perform a given daydreamed plan based on which “feels
best” or which the person is most “comfortable” with. In DAYDREAMER,
however, these sensibilities must be made concrete. We therefore present three
daydream evaluation metrics: desirability, realism, and similarity.
Suppose DAYDREAMER generates two alternative future daydreams in
which she preserves her possessions in case of an earthquake in Los Angeles:

(a) move to New York, or (b) stay in Los Angeles and purchase insurance. The
first daydream has the following negative consequence: She will lose her job in
Los Angeles. Thus the first daydream has a lower desirability than the second.
As a result, DAYDREAMER will select the second daydream rather than the
first for execution in performance mode.
While planning for one personal goal, side effects or consequences for other
personal goals are detected as follows: Either a personal goal activation, success,
or failure happens to be inferred (through application of an inference rule) or
such a personal goal happens to result as a subgoal of the personal goal originally being planned. Therefore, the desirability of a final daydream scenario
is calculated according to the sum of the importances of each of the personal
goals activated or resolved some time after the activation of the top-level goal
of the concern. Goal successes have positive importance while goal failures and
active goals have negative importance. A negative desirability thus indicates an
undesirable scenario while a positive value indicates a desirable one. The im-

110

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING

THROUGH DAYDREAMING

portance of a goal is initially set according to an intrinsic importance assigned
by the inference rule which activated that goal (which in turn is determined by
the programmer). However, this initial importance may be modified through

processes such as rationalization (discussed in Chapter 3.)
Suppose DAYDREAMER instead daydreams that she moves to New York and
becomes a famous artist. This might have a higher desirability than the daydream of purchasing insurance in Los Angeles. However, it has a much lower
realism. Although daydreams of low realism may be useful for further daydreaming (such as in generating rationalizations or in the generation of more
realistic solutions through incremental modification), DAYDREAMER should
not generate external behavior based on an unrealistic daydream—the sequence
of actions taken by the program, when performed in the external world, would
be unlikely to result in the daydreamed outcome. Therefore, DAYDREAMER
decides whether to act on a given daydream based on both the desirability and
realism of that daydream. In this case, staying in Los Angeles receives a higher
overall evaluation based on both desirability and realism, and the program decides to stay in Los Angeles.
On a scale from 0 to 1, the realism of a scenario is evaluated based on
the plausibilities of the rules employed in generating that scenario.
1 indicates a completely realistic scenario while 0 indicates a completely unrealistic
one. Methods for calculating scenario realisms are discussed by Shortliffe and

Buchanan (1975), Duda, P. E. Hart, and Nilsson (1976), Charniak (1983b), and
Pearl (1982). Evaluations of desirability and realism are stored along with daydreams in episodic memory. Realisms, but not desirabilities, are also associated
with subepisodes (episodes associated with subgoals).
One might object to the absence of such metrics as cost and risk. However,
such metrics are subsumed—albeit in a rudimentary manner—by the above
metrics: The cost of executing a given plan is equivalent to the (negative) impact
of that plan on personal goals: For example, if running to the store before it
closes causes one to become fatigued, this cost is accounted for in a personal goal
not to become fatigued. The risk of a given plan is also determined by negative
impact on personal goals—provided that the scenario has a high realism. That
is, if a plan is risky, it is likely that it will result in negative consequences: For
example, since robbing a bank is risky, a realistic daydream about robbing a
bank would include getting caught. If getting caught were overlooked by the
daydream, it would then have a low realism. Thus cost and risk are taken into
account by the desirability and realism metrics.
Another metric, that of s¢milarity, is not applied when storing an episode,
but rather when an episode is retrieved. While desirability and realism evaluate
daydreams in isolation from any particular task, the similarity metric is an evaluation of a daydream in terms of a particular target situation—the similarity of
the source and target goals is evaluated. The similarity of two goal objectives is
determined through a structural comparison of those two objectives. Similarity
may be determined according to the distance of the types of two objectives in

4.4.

EVALUATION AND DECISION MAKING

itt

the type hierarchy and recursively according to the similarity of the components of the two objectives; differences occurring deeper in the structure have
a smaller weighting. For example, in the current program, the similarity of the
REVENGE goal against Harrison Ford and the REVENGE goal against Robert
Redford is 2.4. The similarity of the REVENGE goal against Harrison Ford
and the REVENGE goal against the daydreamer’s boss is 2.1. These two goals
are less similar than the previous two because one of the latter goals involves
REVENGE for a failed LOVERS goal while the other of the latter goals involves
REVENGE for a failed EMPLOYMENT goal. In the former case, both goals
involved LOVERS goals. The similarity of the REVENGE goal against Harrison
Ford and a FOOD goal is a large negative number.
In the current version of DAYDREAMER, this similarity evaluation is sufficient to select, out of several alternative episodes, the episode most appropriate
to the target goal. This metric, for example, will enable the program to select

REVENGE3

instead of REVENGE1

the next time an EMPLOYMENT

RE-

VENGE daydream is generated. However, as the number of indexed daydreams
and episodes becomes large, similarity will have to be measured in terms of
relevant features of the goal objective and of the enclosing situation. The program will have to determine such features automatically in order for it to learn
effectively. For example, DAYDREAMER might build up a large collection of
alternative plans for forming LOVERS relationships with people depending on
the particular personality traits of the person. Given a new person, the best,
most similar, plan would have to be selected using those traits as indices.
Daydream evaluation is employed at several points in processing:

e During production: As a daydream or external plan is generated, an ongoing assessment of its realism is maintained. A planning branch is abandoned if (a) the current concern is a personal goal or learning daydreaming

goal and (b) the scenario realism falls below a certain threshold (higher
for personal goals than for learning daydreaming goals). For example, in
planning for a future date via REHEARSAL, if an earthquake is imagined
to occur in the middle of the date, this scenario will be deemed unrealistic
and abandoned.

e After production: After generation of a daydream or external plan, its
desirability and realism are evaluated for later use in deciding whether or
not to employ that episode.

e During application: When several previous daydreamed or real planning
episodes are retrieved as potentially applicable to a given situation, those
episodes are evaluated with respect to the current situation. That is, the
similarity of the source and target goals is calculated.

112

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING

THROUGH DAYDREAMING

|ordering? |ondering3 |
(episode [|simi.|realism |desir.| ordering gg
el ee
PREVENGEL Nog3d [cut 16)
b nu
3a [= 2 | 18[2eee
PREVENG||ES
Table 4.1: Ordering of Retrieved Episodes

4.4.2

Daydream Selection

Several previously daydreamed or real plans for a goal may be retrieved when
planning to achieve that goal in a new daydream or performance mode experience. How does DAYDREAMER choose which of these episodes to employ?
In DAYDREAMER, the ordering of episodes as candidates for potential use
is calculated according to the stored desirabilities and realisms of those episodes,
and the assessed similarity of those episodes to the current situation.
This
calculation is different depending on the type of concern. If the concern is a
personal goal or a learning daydreaming goal, then the ordering is based on
the product of desirability, realism, and similarity, provided that each is above
a certain threshold (higher for personal goals than for learning daydreaming
goals). Otherwise, the ordering is based on the similarity, provided it is above
a certain threshold.
For example, suppose DAYDREAMER is about to generate another REVENGE daydream after being fired from her job. Previous REVENGE daydreams, REVENGE]

and REVENGBS,

are recalled, and an ordering for these

episodes is determined as shown in Table 4.1. Since the current concern is
a daydreaming goal, the ordering of these daydreams is based only upon the
similarity, shown as ordering1. Therefore, REVENGES is attempted before
REVENGE1. (REVENGE3 will succeed and so REVENGE1 will never be attempted.) If the current concern had instead been a learning daydreaming goal,
the orderings would have been based upon the product of the three evaluations, shown as ordering2. Again, in this case, REVENGE3 would have been
attempted before REVENGE1.
However, if the current concern had been a
personal goal (and thus a performance mode experience), the realism of both of
these episodes would have been below the acceptable minimum level of realism
for performance mode planning. Thus the ordering would have been 0 for both
episodes and neither would have been employed in the generation of external
behavior.
If all the retrieved alternative daydreams for achieving a given goal have a
low or negative desirability, this is an indication that the goal itself may not be
a good idea. Therefore, whenever all daydreamed attempts to achieve an active
goal have negative desirability, that active goal is deactivated. This enables the
program to learn to avoid pursuing certain courses of action. For example, in the
case of the movie star, it might be determined that dating movie stars always

4.5.

INTENTION FORMATION AND APPLICATION

113

turns out bad.

4.5

Intention Formation

and Application

In daydreaming, one often makes mental notes, commonly called intentions,
about what one will do in the future: One thinks something along the lines of
“next time X happens, I will do Y” or “tomorrow I will do Z.” Intentions, once
formed, do not remain in consciousness. Rather, an intention is reactivated only
at some appropriate time in the future.
We distinguish between persistent and one-shot intentions. A persistent
intention is a generalized plan to be applied whenever a certain situation arises in
the future: for example, to run for the nearest doorway in case of an earthquake,
to check that the car lights are turned off before leaving the car, to call a store
to make sure it is open before driving there, to dress up before going out alone,
when meeting a new person to find out the telephone number of that person in
order to be able to contact that person in the future, and so on. A one-shot
intention, on the other hand, is a more or less specific plan which applies once
and is then deactivated: for example, to go grocery shopping on the way home
from work, to pick up a copy of a newspaper while shopping, to mail a letter,
and so on.
Our distinction between the recall of persistent and one-shot intentions is

similar, but not identical to, the distinction of Meacham and Leiman (1982) between habitual prospective remembering and episodic prospective remembering:
Habitual remembering is more specific than recall of persistent intentions—it
involves the recall of intentions as part of a routine, such as taking vitamins each
morning at breakfast. Episodic remembering, however, is basically the same as
the recall of a one-shot intention.
It is sometimes difficult to distinguish the two classes: Planning a particular
sentence for use in a particular job interview may be viewed as a one-shot
intention since it is performed only once; and yet, if the person does not get
- the job and has to go to more interviews, this same sentence could be employed
again and again. For the present purposes, any detailed future plan which has
the potential of being applied more than once in the future is considered a
persistent intention.
In modeling intentions, we must consider both how intentions are formed
and how they are later recalled and acted upon. That is, how is a particular
plan generated and then how is a later situation recognized as appropriate for
application of this plan? First we consider persistent intentions.
We hypothesize that persistent intentions correspond to daydreamed episodes
having high evaluations. That is, persistent intentions are formed though the
generation, evaluation, and storage of daydreamed scenarios in episodic memory;
such episodes are indexed under the goal of the scenario and other indices, such

114

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING

THROUGH DAYDREAMING

as emotions, persons, and physical objects.8 Whenever a similar goal is activated

in the future (and other indices are active), this episode will be recalled and
potentially applied. (If several episodes are recalled it will then be necessary to
select from among these episodes.) Proper recall of a persistent intention then
depends on proper indexing of the episode.
We further hypothesize that one-shot intentions correspond to concerns in
DAYDREAMER. In effect, each currently active concern constitutes an intention

to complete that concern.

A concern (and therefore a one-shot intention) is

initiated upon activation of a personal or daydreaming goal. Processing activity
on behalf of a given concern is performed when that concern has the highest level
of motivation, as provided by emotions. Once initiated, a concern persists until
completion. This tendency of humans to complete a task once begun—even
if interrupted—has been demonstrated in psychological experiments (Lewin,
1926/1951) and observed by other researchers (Mandler, 1975; Miller, Galanter,
& Pribram, 1960). However, a concern may be interrupted in DAYDREAMER
if a new concern is initiated with a higher level of motivation or if an existing
concern acquires a higher level of motivation. An existing concern can acquire a
higher level of motivation if, while performing another concern, something comes
up which is relevant to that concern. This is detected through two mechanisms:
e Fortuitous subgoal success: While performing a personal goal concern, an
active subgoal of another personal goal concern is accidentally achieved.
A surprise emotion is generated and becomes an additional motivating
emotion associated with the second concern.

e Serendipity: An input state, retrieved episode, or internally generated
state accidentally suggests a solution to another concern. A surprise emotion is generated and associated with the second concern. See Chapter 5
for details.
Sometimes an interrupted concern is resumed shortly thereafter—for example, when the concern is interrupted by a short concern such as (in humans)
swatting a mosquito—while other times a concern is interrupted by a longer
concern. In both cases, there is the potential that yet other concerns will be
activated or that other concerns will acquire greater motivation, so that the
interrupted concern will not resume execution immediately after completion
of the interrupting concern. It is possible for the program to follow a series
of interruptions from each concern it is working on, returning to interrupted
concerns only when concerns complete or when interrupted concerns acquire
8However, humans often decide on a single, best daydream to perform in the future. This
one daydream is the intention. In DAYDREAMER, a particular daydream could be designated

as such if it had a evaluation sufficiently higher than each of the other candidates. For the
time being, however, all daydreams with successful evaluations are stored, and the daydream
with the highest evaluation may be considered as the single intention since it is most likely to
be employed in future performance mode planning.

4.5.

INTENTION FORMATION AND APPLICATION

115

higher motivation. There is no special mechanism for resumption of interrupted
concerns, since when an interrupting concern completes, it is removed and the
program continues processing with the most highly motivated concern at that
time (which is often, but not always, the last interrupted concern). Concerns
are also interrupted and placed into a nonrunable state if the program desires
to perform an action and is currently in daydreaming mode or the program
is in performance mode and that action contains variables. This distinction
in our program between runable and nonrunable concerns accounts for results

discussed by Lewin (1926/1951): Resumption of an interrupted activity occurs
even without external stimulus related to that activity (as in runable concerns),
while unperformed intentions require appropriate external stimulus to activate
(as in nonrunable concerns reactivated through fortuitous subgoal success and

serendipity).
Humans, of course, may perform more sophisticated planning to interleave
several concerns and achieve greater efficiency. For example, if one concern
has purchasing a newspaper as a subgoal and another has purchasing groceries
as a subgoal, the two subgoals may be accomplished in one, rather than two,
trips to the store (which carries newspapers). DAYDREAMER is not generally
capable of batching plans in this way, since planning is performed separately for
each concern. However, while performing one concern, the program may realize
that the current situation is relevant to another concern, thus achieving a similar
batching effect in an opportunistic manner: In performing the concern to obtain
groceries, the subgoal of being near a newspaper is achieved, thus reactivating
the other concern to purchase a newspaper. Once the newspaper is obtained,
the concern to obtain groceries may be resumed. Experiments (B. Hayes-Roth
& F. Hayes-Roth, 1979) have indicated that human planning is often performed
in such a manner, especially when the plans reach a certain level of complexity.
In addition, although DAYDREAMER plans for each concern separately, one
concern may involve more than one personal goal. In particular, the impact
on personal goals other than the top-level goal is taken into account during
planning.
There are, of course, still difficulties with this approach: The program will
- go through the checkout line twice, failing to realize that it can buy the groceries
and the newspaper at the same time. Also, once having purchased the newspaper, it may continue with that concern, which could take it out of the store
to another location before having purchased the groceries. Avoiding such problems requires more advanced planning techniques (such as those discussed by
Wilensky, 1983 and Sacerdoti, 1977) which are beyond the scope of the current
work.

Lewin (1926/1951, pp.

97-98) argues that the use of associations cannot

account for the recall of an intention on an appropriate occasion since, for ex-

ample, dropping a letter into a mailbox when it is seen (S. Freud, 1901/1960,
p. 152) should increase the force of association between the mailbox and the
dropping of the letter, and yet once this intention is carried out, seeing a sec-

116

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING

THROUGH DAYDREAMING

ond mailbox results in no forces directed toward mailing the letter.? Instead,
he proposes that intentions result in the formation of a tension state called a
“quasi-need” (similar to our emotionally-motivated concerns) to which there
corresponds a set of situations and objects (said to have a “valence” for the
quasi-need) enabling actions which satisfy the quasi-need. In DAYDREAMER, a
“valence” for a concern is determined by whether a situation achieves a subgoal
of that concern or suggests a solution to that concern through serendipity (see
Chapter 5).
Nonetheless, as J. L. Singer (1975) points out, intentions and unfinished business are often recalled in daydreaming via a chain of associations or remindings.
In DAYDREAMER, persistent intentions (stored episodes) can be recalled in this
fashion (see Chapter 8) and one-shot intentions (concerns) can be recalled or
reactivated through an associational process in the space of rule connections.
Why do we sometimes forget our intentions? A common phenomenon is
walking into the kitchen or somewhere else and then wondering what one is
doing there. Perhaps such forgetting is caused by daydreaming about things
other than the current plan, which pushes that plan out of limited-capacity
working memory (as suggested by J. R. Anderson, 1983, p. 130). S. Freud,

(1901/1960) discusses the forgetting of intentions caused by obscure motives
(see also Lewin, 1926/1951). In DAYDREAMER, a persistent intention might
be forgotten if an episode is improperly indexed; a one-shot intention might be
forgotten if the serendipity mechanism is unable to find a relationship between
the current situation and a concern when it should.

4.6

Related Work in Machine Learning

There has been much work in the past on learning by creating new inference,
planning, or production rules and modifying existing ones. Bundy, Silver, and

Plummer (1985) and Dietterich and Michalski (1983), for example, review this
work. Typical basic strategies for rule creation and modification include: (a)
dropping conditions, (b) adding conditions, (c) converting constants into variables (variabilization), (d) converting variables into constants (instantiation),
and (e) composing two rules. New rules are created in DAYDREAMER through
the UNDO-CAUSES strategy for the REVERSAL daydreaming goal. (An additional input induction strategy, not developed extensively in the present work, is

used in DAYDREAMER to create a new planning rule through the variabilization
of two consecutive input states in certain specialized situatious.) The UNDOCAUSES strategy is used when a personal goal failure results from the absence
of some state in some situation. It creates a new rule which initiates plan° Although this may be true in most cases, informal observations suggest that one may
sometimes become confused about whether a given intention has been carried out. Perhaps it
is possible that daydreamed actions may be confused with real ones or that confusions among
similar intentions may occur.

4.6.

RELATED

WORK IN MACHINE LEARNING

ssNG

ning to achieve that absent state in future similar situations. Sussman’s (1975)
HACKER program used a similar strategy for correcting failures or “bugs” in
a plan given the reason for the failure.
DAYDREAMER primarily learns through the generation, evaluation, storage, retrieval, and application of daydreamed episodes. Although planning and
inference rules are neither created nor modified by this process, new episodes
improve the program’s ability to select from among alternative rules in any
given situation. Rules which were previously inaccessible in a given situation
may become accessible. Since daydreamed episodes are applied through a process of analogical planning, the remainder of this section is devoted to a review
of previous work in this area.
The analogical planning mechanism of DAYDREAMER is similar to Car-

bonell’s (1983) method for learning by analogy. Both methods employ the
following steps to solve a new problem: (a) recall the solution to a previous
similar problem, and (b) employ that solution to reduce search in generating a
solution to the new problem.
In particular, Carbonell starts with a “means-ends analysis” (Newell & Simon, 1972) framework for problem solving: The task is to find a sequence of
operators which transform an initial state in the problem space into a final
(goal) state; a difference function is used to compute the differences between
one state and another; operators are indexed by the differences they reduce.
In general, problem solving involves a repeated process of selecting operators
which reduce the differences between the current state and the goal state (and
appropriate recursion for subproblems resulting from operators with unsatisfied

preconditions).
Problem solving by analogy is then carried out as follows: The initial and
goal states and other constraints of the current problem are compared to those of
previously solved problems, using the difference function as a similarity metric.
In addition, the percentage of preconditions of those operators employed in the
previous problem solution which are already satisfied in the new situation is
calculated. The previous problem solution most similar to the new problem
according to these metrics is then selected (or a number of previous solutions
are selected).
The previous solution is then transformed into a solution to the new problem
as follows: A process of problem solving is carried out in a higher-level space
of problem solutions called “T-space” (for transform space), with the previous
solution as the initial state and a solution to the new problem as the goal
state. This task is performed through a process of means-ends analysis whose
available “T-operators” include: inserting an operator into the solution, deleting
an operator,

reordering

operators,

substituting

operator parameters,

and

(a)

invoking means-ends analysis in the (lower-level) problem space in order to
achieve an operator precondition satisfied in the previous situation but not in
the new one and then (b) splicing the resulting subsequence into the solution.
DAYDREAMER employs a subgoaling framework rather than a means-ends

118

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING

THROUGH DAYDREAMING

analysis one. A previous plan, recalled primarily on the basis of the similarity of
the previous goal to the new one (but according to other indices as well), funetions as a “suggestion” to the process of planning for the new goal. Nonetheless,
the operations which DAYDREAMER performs as it generates a new plan are
analogous to “T-operators”: (a) a subtree for achieving a subgoal satisfied in the
original situation but not in the new one may be generated and spliced in, (b) a
subtree for a subgoal satisfied in the new situation but not in the original may
be deleted, (c) a subtree for achieving a subgoal may be generated and spliced
in when the plan for that subgoal was applicable in the original situation but is
not applicable in the new one, and (d) parameters may be substituted.
Analogical planning in DAYDREAMER is also related to the “purposedirected analogy” mechanism of Kedar-Cabelli (1985). Given a goal concept
(e.g., a hot cup), purpose of that concept (e.g., to enable one to drink hot liquids), a target example (e.g., a styrofoam cup), and domain knowledge, the
mechanism (a) retrieves a known instance of the goal concept (e.g., a ceramic
mug), (b) generates a proof that this instance satisfies the purpose of the goal
concept (e.g., that a ceramic mug enables one to drink hot liquids), and (c) uses
this proof to construct a proof that the target example satisfies the purpose
of the goal concept (e.g., that a styrofoam cup also enables one to drink hot
liquids). This last step is accomplished in a fashion similar both to analogical
planning in DAYDREAMER and to Carbonell’s analogical problem solving (i.e.,
through incremental repair of the proof). A generalization may then be formed
from the common features of the two proofs; this generalization provides a definition of the goal concept stated in terms of lower-level structural features (e.g.,
upward concavity, flat bottom, and so on) instead of higher-level functional ones
(e.g., used to drink hot liquids).
Kedar-Cabelli assumes that the source and target concept instances are
given, and therefore does not address the problem of finding an analogy in
the first place. In contrast, DAYDREAMER selects episodes related to the
current situation automatically. Unlike the analogical planning mechanism of
DAYDREAMER,

neither the scheme of Carbonell nor that of Kedar-Cabelli en-

ables incorrect subgoals in a tentative analogical plan to be themselves repaired
through further (recursive) analogical planning. Carbonell, however, has suggested two related ideas: (a) two recalled solutions might be combined into one
(p. 144), and (b) future problems in T-space might be solved by analogy to
previous T-space problem solutions (p. 149). The mechanisms of Carbonell
and Kedar-Cabelli are otherwise quite similar to our analogical planning mechanism. Analogical planning in DAYDREAMER is also similar to the chunking on
goal hierarchies of Rosenbloom (1983) and the work on MACROPS in STRIPS

(Fikes, Hart, P. E., & Nilsson, 1972).
However, unlike these mechanisms, our mechanism is embedded within a
larger framework and set of strategies for learning from imagined past and fu-

ture scenarios:

(a) upon a failure in the external world, alternative past sce-

narios may be generated, evaluated (for example, according to the impact on

4.6.

RELATED

WORK IN MACHINE LEARNING

119

various personal goals of the program) and stored for possible future application
by analogy, and (b) possible future situations and plans may be hypothesized,
evaluated, and stored for possible future application by analogy. Analogical
planning is thus used as the basic mechanism for applying previous imagined
scenarios to the generation of new imagined scenarios, as well as to the generation of external actions in performance mode. In addition, this mechanism
enables previous real episodes (hand-coded or formed during a performance
mode experience) similar to a hypothesized scenario to be employed by analogy
in generating possible continuations of that scenario. Furthermore, we consider
the possibility and role of accidentally becoming reminded of a previous problem
directly or indirectly applicable to a current problem (serendipity).

fsb

easter
neste

4 pos:

-_

Sri

beer aves na Of

aicnakstintotmades hestenidegnat

ee me

| = ideng

iw

tat

itstabs

boaseal sepia Kia) wredeltvy

deurtaweraeOf aledaciieneta

» cap), puerj

ie a gee

esis?

otpeay?

ot i ral cade’

ip ini sebieves o lance
7

.

oi acca a pir?

hae ethos A

he
-

oo is

»

Cp

Haggai’ ri, ‘oot =

eye a

Tew

ies

ef

a

pee
be
_

7

-

OS>
:

ti

“en
cet OW ttle. agedee

Pare

ae

wy eliasfr paaley ‘ank £

x a

L Sere

ive?

bl

her

rit

Terai

"ar tte

y

4

‘

Ji. ent

‘7

|

vi

cs

sh

>

sir

A.

wa

‘

—_—

Mae

OA

«

i

AR

Lael

tt

_

lw

bot

Dar

«

et

aun ald “ynee

ie

ln

ete mshi
7

at

y

ivelie

=a 2 Cuil

3.

‘i

«nD

i

“~

he

i

;

-

|

aay.

,

;

uel»
Ad
ay

a

Epepe ial Haeeyo potent
Vey

beer gen art 7

(etnies writ
ow ®

‘

ne

ohn

7

/

a

4
‘
‘

steht

eewrrio=

pip?

;

rian citi

;

’

——

}

T

LPP

’%

|

it

.

rm i sagt ve yriadell
rt
ee

im

a

e.4

abate

:

|

ae

Ty ding, cfr

Cyd

‘

pase

ae wrale

ofSarlavnet I

‘

eoby

_ -

ihe

Dae

iii

=tf

f

ee

ata

= arneinhevel Sects :
“
-e

1

re

pe

}
|

AY
¥

Ge
i

ten

o

>,

Se

ovata

iw

i

beiy

pen
brn

a
sas
Lee rap

|

a

ree

'

Aare

Vii i

on uel (aie

“

ur

be

—-

ates

+?

eer

—

er

Golhfneuiy iideg hat

ants

>

pie

7

ma?

31).

aw

i

—_

wdrom

ioe

on

pee toa

eines.

Heme.ep

one

e%

be

bs

a0

quite, wel. eerie
ping aril a
«

int,-

and her

tig eonidesoneteil i

son——

-

4h extelilE-ionp ite

Soph

thatanct oF rhe etal SiC ‘6

aio nflatied

piespes is CA

tpg.

ar ee

thal“teh tet the Phat

eeramie

yadeened ta mete

it oe mil

:
+

,

cavwlepe” MePornmem <P Kida Cnbili THR). te

5:
1

=

wie

wns ietx alo boberinee? auderiex 6 heer

ii Hed

-

Wi

maT FE eta putegig sical END

saab
*. 9

ss
—

sire

ag

me
&

“

:

:

|
ae"

Chapter 5

Everyday Creativity in
Daydreaming
Everyday leaps of creativity often occur in the spontaneous and free-flowing
internal activity of daydreaming:
e A daydream about an unlikely event or a fanciful solution to a problem
may lead, through modification, to a plausible, useful solution. For example, suppose it is raining outside and you would like to get the newspaper
without getting wet, but you don’t have a raincoat.! You happen to gaze
at a plant in the room and begin daydreaming that the plant grows at an
accelerated rate, reaches the newspaper, coils around it, and then enables
you to pull the paper in by pulling on the plant. This fanciful solution
may lead you toward a more feasible approach such as fetching the paper
with a long stick.
e Potential solutions to problems may be generated through the serendipitous detection of relationships among objects or events during daydreaming. We saw an example of this above: the plant, an accidental input,
was related to the current problem of fetching the newspaper. Here is another example:

Suppose you want to meet a famous actor.

Then suppose

you start thinking about a movie the actor starred in. Then you recall
that you were in a minor car accident on the way back from that movie.
You remember exchanging telephone numbers and other information with
the person you rear-ended. You realize that if you know what streets the
movie star uses, one way of meeting the star (if it is worth it to you) is to
force an accident with the star.

Previous work in the field of artificial intelligence on problem solving (Newell,
J. C. Shaw, & Simon, 1957; Fikes & Nilsson, 1971; Sacerdoti, 1977; Wilensky,
1This example problem (but not the solutions) is borrowed from Wilensky (1983).

121

122

CHAPTER 5. EVERYDAY CREATIVITY IN DAYDREAMING

1983) has ignored the role of accident and the role of fanciful thinking—two
important aspects of creative problem solving.
In this chapter, we address the problem of constructing a daydreaming computer program—DAYDREAMER—which exhibits these properties: To address
the recognition and exploitation of accidental relationships among problems, we
propose a serendipity mechanism. To address the generation of fanciful possibilities, we propose a mechanism for the arbitrary mutation of daydreamed
events.

First, we address the problem of how creativity is defined from a computational standpoint. Second, we explore in more detail some of the attributes of
creativity as identified by previous investigators. Third and fourth, we describe
the mechanisms of serendipity and mutation which address those attributes.
Fifth, we relate our mechanisms to the well-known (Wallas, 1926, pp. 79-107)
phenomena of incubation and insight. Sixth, we review previous related work
in artificial intelligence in detail.

5.1

Definition of Creativity

Creativity is generally defined as the production of something—a scientific theory, work of art, poem, novel, and so on—which is both novel and valuable according to consensual judgment (Rothenberg, 1979, pp. 3-6). DAYDREAMER
is concerned with finding creative solutions to problems in the fields of interpersonal relations, employment, and the like.
The value of a solution is measured in DAYDREAMER according to the metrics of desirability and realism: Desirability measures the value of the outcome of
a scenario in terms of the degree of satisfaction of each of the personal goals of
the system. Realism measures the likelihood that the sequence of actions specified
by the solution will result in the outcome.
A novel solution to a problem is any solution which was previously unknown
to the system. However, this definition presents an apparent paradox: It seems
that any solution generated by the system without external input cannot be
unknown, since if it was able to generate the solution, it must have already
known that solution. Nonetheless, novel solutions often arise in closed systems.
The answer is as follows: Although every future solution to a problem is indeed
inherent in the current state of the program, reaching a future solution may
require a significant amount of processing. A given solution should be considered
known only if the system can generate that solution in a short amount of time.
Any solution which would require an expensive search process to find given the
current system state (that is, without the occurrence of accidents sidestepping
the search, as discussed below) is an novel solution with respect to that system
state. Thus, a new solution is one which, without the occurrence of an accident,
could not have been generated in the past—at all, or without having consumed
more than a certain amount of time and space resources.

5.2.

ASPECTS OF CREATIVITY IN DAYDREAMING

5.2

123

Aspects of Creativity in Daydreaming

In the past, several investigators have related daydreaming and creativity:

S.

Freud (1908/1962) proposes that, like daydreams, works of fiction result from
ungratified wishes, with the difference that in fiction appropriate literary devices
are employed to sufficiently soften or disguise those wishes:
A strong experience in the present awakens in the creative writer a

memory of an earlier experience (usually belonging to his childhood)
from which there now proceeds a wish which finds its fulfilment in
the creative work. The work itself exhibits elements of the recent
provoking occasion as well as of the old memory. (p. 151)

Rothenberg (1979) writes that “during the course of [the] process of discovery,
the creative person engages in a good deal of fantasy” (p. 129) and “his thoughts
may rove freely, but he is constantly alert and prepared to select and relate his
thoughts to the creative task he is engaged in” (p. 130). Several studies have
investigated the relationship between daydreaming and creativity (J. L. Singer,
1975, pp. 66-67).
In this section, we discuss three attributes of a creative system: breaking
away, fanciful possibility generation, and finding new connections. We then
propose two mechanisms in DAYDREAMER to address these attributes.

5.2.1

Breaking Away

Several theories of creativity refer to breaking away from established patterns
of thought: Wertheimer (1945) proposes that productive thinking involves being sensitive to disturbances, gaps, superficialities, and distortions in the initial
structural view of a problem situation, which leads to reorganization, reorientation, and improvement of that view. Guilford (1967) discusses the production of

possibilities which diverge from existing sets. DeBono (1970) describes a technique called “lateral thinking” which helps one escape from existing thought

patterns.

Adams

(1974) discusses the importance of overcoming perceptual,

emotional, cultural, environmental, and other conceptual blocks.

5.2.2

Fanciful Possibility Generation

The importance of generating possibilities or variations in quantity and suspending judgment have been emphasized by several authors: In 1788, Schiller

(quoted by S. Freud, 1900/1965) wrote:
It seems a bad thing and detrimental to the creative work of the
mind if Reason makes too close an examination of the ideas as they
come pouring in—at the very gateway, as it were. Looked at in
isolation, a thought may seem very trivial or very fantastic; but it

CHAPTER 5. EVERYDAY CREATIVITY IN DAYDREAMING

124

may be made important by another thought that comes after it, and,
in conjunction with other thoughts that may seem equally absurd,

it may turn out to form a most effective link. (p. 135)
In Osborn’s (1953) “brainstorming” technique for group problem solving, participants are encouraged to generate wild ideas and not to criticize those of other
participants.

The generation of variations on a theme is considered to be the

essence of creativity by Hofstadter (1985).
It is useful to generate fanciful possibilities and variations in quantity for
two reasons: First, a fanciful scenario may turn out not to be as unrealistic as
initially thought: Daydreaming about an earthquake might pay off if and when
that earthquake actually occurs. Second, a fanciful scenario may lead through
modification to a useful solution to a problem, as we saw above.
Therefore, a creative system must have the capability of generating many
fanciful and realistic possibilities. In addition, it must be able to evaluate and
select from among those possibilities, and to modify and repair those possibilities
to suit certain purposes.

5.2.3

Finding New Connections

Several theories characterize creativity in terms of recognizing and exploiting
new connections among, or combinations of, existing elements.

Mednick (1962) proposes that creative thought consists of the formation
of new and useful combinations of elements which are remotely associated with
each other—the novelty of the combination being proportional to the associative
remoteness of the elements. He proposes that the combination of two remote
ideas can be suggested through accidental environmental stimuli, through similarity of the two ideas along certain dimensions, and through a mediating third
idea in common with the two ideas.
Koestler (1964) proposes that creative acts result from “bisociation” —the
coming together of two previously unrelated associative contexts or frames of reference (such as music and arithmetic in the harmonic laws posited by Pythago-

ras).
Rothenberg (1979) characterizes creativity in terms of what he calls “janusian” thinking and “homospatial” thinking. He defines janusian thinking as
“actively conceiving two or more opposite or antithetical ideas, images, or concepts simultaneously” (p. 55) and homospatial thinking as “actively conceiving
two or more discrete entities occupying the same space, a conception leading to

the articulation of new identities.” (p. 69)

5.2.4

Mechanisms

in DAYDREAMER

We propose two mechanisms in DAYDREAMER to (a) break away from possibilities generated by the existing analogical planning mechanism and daydreaming
goals, (b) generate fanciful possibilities, and (c) find new connections:

5.3.

SERENDIPITY IN DAYDREAMING

125

e Serendipity: generating a new solution to a problem through the accidental
juxtaposition of a recalled experience, input physical object, or input or
internally generated state with that problem.
e Mutation: generating possibilities through arbitrary modification of existing possibilities, which sometimes leads to new solutions.

5.3

Serendipity in Daydreaming

A serendipity typically involves a scenario such as the following: One is having
trouble solving a problem. Every possibility that one tries does not seem to
work. So, one sets the problem aside for a while. Then at some later time—
perhaps while reading a book, watching a movie, or daydreaming—one suddenly
realizes that something just experienced or thought of is applicable to the problem. By accident one has stumbled upon a potential solution. One can then go
back, verify the solution, and flesh it out. The solution may be discarded if it
does not work.
In the performance mode experience RECOVERY3 (see page 13), DAYDREAMER receives an alumni directory from the college she attended which
happens to contain the number of Carol Burnett. DAYDREAMER had previously been daydreaming about contacting Harrison Ford in order to ask him
out again. Serendipitously, DAYDREAMER realizes that the alumni directory
is applicable to the problem of finding out the unlisted telephone number of
Harrison Ford. DAYDREAMER could possibly find out Harrison’s telephone
number by obtaining a copy of the alumni directory from the college Harrison
Ford attended, if any.
Serendipity may occur when one notices that something currently under
focus suggests a solution for a recent (but not necessarily under current focus)
problem. Serendipity may also occur when a new problem is initiated, and one
notices that something recently (or currently) under focus suggests a solution
_ for the new problem. It does not matter whether the plan is introduced prior
to the goal or the goal is introduced prior to the plan. This is analogous to the
commutativity property in the “scientific community metaphor” of Kornfeld

and Hewitt (1981).
We distinguish several cases of serendipity in DAYDREAMER:

e Episode-driven serendipity. retrieval of an episode or storage of a new
episode suggests a previously unknown solution for an active, suspended,
or halted concern.

e Object-driven serendipity: a special case of the above in which episode
retrieval results in response to physical objects provided as input to DAYDREAMER.

CHAPTER

126

5. EVERYDAY CREATIVITY IN DAYDREAMING

e Rule-induction-driven serendipity: another special case, employed in RECOVERY3, in which a new episode is stored which contains a new episodic
rule induced from states or actions provided as input to DAYDREAMER.
e Concern-activation-driven serendipity: a previously unknown solution to
a newly created concern is suggested by a recently retrieved episode.
e Input-state-driven serendipity: a state or action provided as input to the
program suggests a solution to an active, suspended, or halted concern.
This mechanism is used for the recall of previous intentions.
e Mutation-driven serendipity: arbitrary mutation of an action suggests a
potentially new solution for a particular concern.

In DAYDREAMER, serendipity enables discovery of a new solution through
the use of normally unavailable planning paths or rules. Specifically, in concernactivation-driven serendipity and episode-driven serendipity, a solution to a
problem is generated which could not have been generated previously because
the solution employs a rule which was inaccessible to regular and analogical
planning. An inaccessible rule is an episodic rule? which is contained only in
inaccessible episodes (e.g., episodes requiring physical objects as retrieval indices). As solution generated by mutation-driven serendipity may not have
previously been generated because of “mental blocks” (or failures to consider
certain planning paths, to be discussed) inherent in regular planning. A previously blocked solution can be generated by input-state-driven serendipity as a
result of particular situations in the external world that had never arisen before.

5.3.1

Serendipity-Based Learning

Serendipity in planning leads naturally to learning: Once a plan is found through
serendipity, it is not necessary for another serendipity to occur in order to employ
a similar plan in a future similar situation. Instead, the plan is incorporated
into episodic memory, indexed under the goal it achieves, so that in the future
this plan can be applied directly to a similar goal through analogical planning.
Serendipity enables learning since the result of a serendipity is stored as an
episode for possible use in future similar situations.
For example, suppose DAYDREAMER is again concerned with how to meet
Harrison Ford when it happens to have a car accident. As DAYDREAMER is
exchanging telephone numbers and other information with the person, it notices
that one way of meeting Harrison Ford is to force an accident with him. The
next time the program has the goal of meeting someone, the plan of forcing an
accident with that person will immediately be retrieved. This solution is one
which would have been difficult to generate out of thin air. Thus the program
has learned through its previous serendipity experience.
?Episodic rules, contained initially in hand-coded episodes (and also induced in RECOVERY3), are discussed in greater detail in Chapter 4.

5.3.

SERENDIPITY IN DAYDREAMING

Episode
retrieved

Concern
activated

Serendipity
recognition

127

Input
received

.
be

Mutation
generated

Intersection search +
path verification

(if found)

Full planning

Figure 5.1: Serendipity

5.3.2

Serendipity Recognition

As shown in Figure 5.1, DAYDREAMER attempts to find a serendipity whenever:

(a) an episode is retrieved, (b) a concern is activated, (c) an input state or action
is received, or (d) a mutated possibility is generated. In this section, we address
how DAYDREAMER recognizes and exploits a serendipity in these situations.
In RECOVERYS3, the program has an active RECOVERY concern to generate a scenario in which she asks Harrison Ford out on a date in the future.
Given the input that Carol Burnett’s telephone number is in the UCLA Alumni
Directory, the program recognizes the following connection between these input states and its active RECOVERY concern: a subgoal of asking Harrison
out is having a communication path to Harrison; a subgoal of having a communication path to Harrison is calling Harrison on the telephone; a subgoal of
calling Harrison on the telephone is knowing his telephone number; a subgoal
of knowing his telephone number is reading his telephone number in an Alumni
directory; a subgoal of reading his telephone number in an Alumni directory is
the Alumni directory containing his telephone number; a subgoal of the Alumni
directory containing his telephone number is the Alumni directory being that
of the college he attended.
In general, how does the program determine whether a given planning rule
(an inaccessible rule contained in a retrieved episode, an induced rule, or one
corresponding to an input state) is applicable to a given goal? A rule would be
applicable to a goal if that rule could be used to achieve that goal, or if that rule
could be used to achieve some subgoal of that goal, and so on. A rule is thus
applicable to a goal if that rule may be used to achieve an arbitrary subgoal
of that goal. There may be several ways of breaking down each subgoal into
further subgoals. Humans seem to be able to detect such a relationship with a
minimum of effort. What algorithms are available to accomplish this task?
The arbitrary applicability of a planning rule to a goal may be detected by
performing an intersection search (Quillian, 1968; Pohl, 1971; Klahr, 1978) in

128

CHAPTER 5. EVERYDAY CREATIVITY IN DAYDREAMING

the rule connection graph (Kowalski, 1975) between the given rule and a rule
for achieving the given goal: The rule connection graph is composed of forward
connections and backward connections between rules. One rule has a forward
connection to another rule for each consequent subgoal of the latter rule which
unifies (Charniak, Riesbeck, & McDermott, 1980; Robinson, 1965) with the
antecedent goal of the former rule. One rule has a backward connection for
each consequent subgoal of each other rule having an antecedent goal which
unifies with the consequent subgoal of the former rule. Connections refer to the
appropriate consequent subgoal. A rule is compiled into the rule connection
graph when it is created.
Anderson (1983) has demonstrated experimentally that humans conduct a
form of intersection search known as “spreading activation.” Since rule intersection graphs are restricted versions of the general graphs constructed and
searched in a spreading activation architecture, it is reasonable to hypothesize
that humans construct and search rule intersection graphs as well. This hypothesis is a topic for future psychological experimentation.
Rule intersection attempts to find paths in the rule connection graph from a
given top rule to a given bottom rule. Quillian (1968) used a breadth-first marking algorithm; Pohl (1971) describes bidirectional search algorithms in more
detail. We employ a recursive bidirectional depth-first algorithm: starting from
the top rule and bottom rule, the procedure works its way down and up at the
same time up to a certain depth limit. The maximum depth cannot be too
great, because even with moderate fanout, the search space grows very quickly
(i.e., exponentially). So far, this has not proved to be a problem in the current
version of DAYDREAMER. Whenever an intersection occurs (with odd or even
path length), the complete path is constructed out of the two half-paths and
added to a list of found paths. Since there may be cycles in the rule connection
graph, the resulting paths may contain cycles. (However, paths are limited to
at most two occurrences of a given rule.) Rule intersection search may only
use generic planning rules or episodic rules contained in a recent episode. Figure 5.2 shows the path found through rule intersection search in the case of
RECOVERY3S.
Finding one or more paths through rule intersection search, however, does
not mean that a serendipity has occurred. The series of rule applications given
by the path might not unify together; that is, a rule might not be applicable to
the result produced by the previous rule. A candidate path must be therefore
be verified for applicability to the specific goal corresponding to the given top
rule. As verification is performed, an episode (planning tree) suitable for use
in analogical planning is created. Figure 5.3 shows the verification episode
which is created in the case of RECOVERY3. The path verification algorithm
constructs concrete subgoals starting from the top rule of the path and moving
downwards until the bottom rule of the path is reached. The subgoal at each
level must unify with the antecedent goal of the rule at that level. Unbound
variables are suitably propagated down the tree (i.e., as in regression [Nilsson,

5.3.

SERENDIPITY IN DAYDREAMING

129

TOP RULE
Mtrans-Plan2

Vprox-Reflexive-Plan

Vprox-Plan1

Vprox-Plan2

At-Plan

M-Phone-Plan

Know-Plan2
:

Mtrans-Plan4 nes

Know-Plan3

oe

¥ found path
forward/backward

ee

BOTTOM RULE

connection

Figure 5.2: Rule Intersection for RECOVERY3

1980]). Episodes associated with rules are also used to supply values for unbound
variables. If verification is unsuccessful (because a subgoal fails to unify with a
rule), the path and episode are discarded. Otherwise, a serendipity has occurred.
In summary, recognizing a serendipity consists of (a) finding a path through the
rule interconnection graph from a rule related to one concern to a rule related
to another concern, and then (b) verifying that path.

5.3.3.

Episode-Driven Serendipity

Episodes provide a useful source of knowledge for the generation of creative
possibilities. Given an episode and a problem, one may always force a solution
to that problem using that episode. The less an episode is related to a problem,
the more bizarre the solution derived from that episode (but the higher the potential for production of a truly new and useful solution). For example, if one
is reminded that the encyclopedia is a source of information, one may generate
the idea to look up the movie star’s telephone number in the encyclopedia. Although one is not likely to find it there, one may later refine this plan into the
more useful one of finding a listing for the movie star in some book that 1s likely
to contain his (or his agent’s) number, such as a Screen Actor’s Guild directory.
Seeing a television show about a high-school reunion may give one the idea of
calling the movie star’s parents and pretending to be an old high-school friend.
An episode which is somehow applicable to a given concern might not be
indexed in such a way as to be accessible by that concern. That episode might
happen to be accessible only while performing some other concern. Therefore,
serendipity recognition is invoked whenever an episode is retrieved (or derived

from input as in RECOVERYS3)

in order to find inaccessible rules contained

130

CHAPTER

5. EVERYDAY CREATIVITY IN DAYDREAMING

MTRANS(Me, Harrison)
Mtrans-Plan2
VPROX(Harrison,Me)
Vprox-Plan2

M-PHONE(Me, Harrison)
M-Phone-Plan
KNOW(Me, TELNO(Harrison))
Know-Plan2
MTRANS(Me,ALUMNI-DIR(?Organization1 ), TELNO(Harrison))
Mtrans-Plan1

TELNO (Harrison)
KNOW(ALUMNI-DIR(?Organization1),
Induced-Rule.9
COLLEGE (Harrison, ?Organization1}

Figure 5.3: Verification Episode for RECOVERY3

in that episode which might be useful in achieving an active concern. Norman
(1982, pp. 24-27) reports experiencing such a serendipitous reminding while
daydreaming in the shower: A string of associations starting from a recent
event led to a forgotten episode coutaining a plan for purchasing a special kind
of photographic slide tray which he was having trouble locating.

5.3.4

Object-Driven Serendipity

The stream of thought does not proceed independently of outside stimuli. As
Klinger (1978) has noted (in contrast to earlier conceptualizations of daydreaming as task-irrelevant thought, daydreaming includes thoughts ranging from the
most stimulus-dependent to the most stimulus-independent. Physical objects
in the environment are especially common triggers and modifiers of stream of
consciousness thought (Pope, 1978)—while daydreaming, one will happen to
gaze at some object in the room, become reminded of some person, episode,
or future plan, and shift to a daydream related to that reminding. You can
demonstrate this effect to yourself by spending a minute or so looking around
the room at various objects and seeing what thoughts come to you. You will
probably experience at least. one reminding (followed by a daydream provided
you do not cut it short) for each object you look at.
Remindings resulting from objects often depend on, and are useful for, suggesting a solution for an active concern. For example, consider the case in which
DAYDREAMER has an active REHEARSAL concern for a LOVERS goal. The
program thus faces the problems of how to initiate a new relationship, how to
meet people, and so on. In an empty context, remindings in response to physical
objects will most likely be recent episodes involving that object or episodes in

5.3.

SERENDIPITY IN DAYDREAMING

131

which that object is particularly salient. However, in the context of an active
concern, remindings often relate somehow to satisfaction of that concern.
Remindings result from physical objects in the daydreams COMPUTERSERENDIPITY and LAMPSHADE-SERENDIPITY (see page 14). One way of
generating these remindings might be to store each episode under two indices:
a personal goal and a physical object. However, in general an episode might
not happen to be indexed under a personal goal to which it could ultimately be
applied. For example, the lampshade episode does not involve a LOVERS goal; it
involves the goal for ENTERTAINMENT at a nightclub. Even so, it is indirectly
applicable to the LOVERS goal through the subgoals of impressing someone
and getting someone to be romantically interested. In general, given a physical
object, we would like to retrieve episodes in which that object is salient which are
related to an arbitrary subgoal of an active concern. Therefore, (a) episodes are
indexed under physical objects salient in those episodes, (b) whenever a physical
object 1s taken as input, serendipity recognition is performed for each episode
indexed under that object, and (c) such an episode is only retrieved if it results
in a serendipity. Physical objects are taken as input when DAYDREAMER runs
out of things to daydream about; such input may also be forced by interrupting
the system.

For example, upon receipt of Computer as input, DAYDREAMER finds several episodes indexed under this physical object. It then performs an intersection
search from the episodic planning rules in those episodes to the rules associated
with active concerns (including LOVERS). It finds a path from an episodic planning rule in the computer dating episode (which states that a way of acceptably
initiating communication with someone one does not already know is through

a dating service) to the rule for achieving LOVERS.

(The reader may consult

Figure 4.8 in Chapter 4 for the specific rules and path.) This path is successfully verified and so a serendipity has occurred and a reminding is produced of
the computer dating episode. The episode produced during path verification is
added as a new analogical plan for the LOVERS goal (actually a subgoal of REHEARSAL) and a potential future plan in which DAYDREAMER joins a dating
service is produced.

What is the purpose of having episodes be retrieved in response to input
physical objects? Why not simply retrieve all episodes having inaccessible rules
applicable to an active concern? For one thing, people obviously don’t perform
such a retrieval; this is probably because the number of episodes would be
too large to handle. For a similar reason, such a retrieval is not performed
in DAYDREAMER. The use of additional surface-level indices such as physical
objects (a) enables appropriate episodes to be retrieved at a more useable rate
and (b) introduces a useful random element into the process of problem solving.
Note, however, that recalling episodes at random would in fact accomplish a
similar function.

CHAPTER 5. EVERYDAY CREATIVITY IN DAYDREAMING

132

5.3.5

Input-State-Driven Serendipity

A serendipity often occurs when the world state is recognized as applicable
in some way to some active concern (F. Hayes-Roth & B. Hayes-Roth, 1979).
For example, Shanon (1981) reports the following experience and resulting daydream: On the way back from the supermarket, the subject (S) passes by a
public garden; S thinks how it is a shame S cannot pick some flowers for H
because it is dark; S then realizes that S can go back to the supermarket to
buy some flowers for H. Therefore, in DAYDREAMER, serendipity recognition 1s
invoked upon receiving an input state or action. The bottom planning rule for
the intersection search is one having a consequent subgoal which unifies with
the input state or action.

In LOVERS!

(see page 3), LOVERS2

(see page 9), and LOVERS3

(see

page 93), the input state is recognized as applicable to her active concern
through the serendipity mechanism. The same mechanism would enable DAYDREAMER to recognize the applicability of the following inputs: someone asking
DAYDREAMER out on a date and someone breaking up with his girlfriend.

5.4

Action

Mutation

Fanciful possibilities are often generated in daydreaming through arbitrary modification of events or goals. Such variations sometimes lead to accidental discovery of a solution to a problem. For example, in the daydream RECOVERY2
(see page 12), the action Harrison Ford tells me his telephone number is transformed into Harrison Ford tells someone else his telephone number. This person
could then tell DAYDREAMER his telephone number. Of course, the movie star
has to want to give his number to this person, who also must want to give the
number to DAYDREAMER. Suitable plans are generated in order to flesh out
this possibility: DAYDREAMER will enlist her friend Karen.
In general, new possibilities for achieving a goal can be generated by (a)
performing a structural transformation on an unachieved action subgoal of that
goal, (b) determining whether the resulting action subgoal is applicable to the
original goal, and (c) if so, attempting to achieve the new action subgoal. In
this section, we present the mechanism of action mutation which enables this
process in DAYDREAMER.

5.4.1

The Purpose of Action Mutation

In designing a daydreaming machine there is a conflict between the need to
reduce the search space and the need to increase the search space: In order to
avoid the combinatorial explosion resulting from alternative possibilities, methods must be employed to select from among available alternatives at each point
in a daydream. However, if possibilities are cut short, more creative solutions

5.4.

ACTION MUTATION

133

buried within those possibilities may never be found. Therefore, a useful addition to the program is a method for exploring possibilities in a somewhat
random fashion and in a quantity which will not overload the program. Thus,
without search reduction, the program would be overloaded with possibilities; with
search reduction, the program may miss creative solutions; somewhat random ezploration of possibilities enables possible discovery of creative solutions even of
search reduction is employed.
The function of action mutation is to generate and explore possibilities which
might not otherwise have been considered by the analogical planning mechanism
of DAYDREAMER: Planning in DAYDREAMER consists of repeatedly breaking
subgoals down into further subgoals until subgoals that are already satisfied are
reached. There are alternative means whereby a given subgoal may be broken
down into further subgoals—these means are specified by both generic rules
and episodes. Finding a solution to a problem thus consists of a search through
this space of alternatives. In principle, then, any valid solution to a problem
may be found though exhaustive search. However, instead of performing an
exhaustive search, the normal planning mechanism of DAYDREAMER employs
the following collection of strategies for reducing the potentially large search
space:
© Limitation on the number of attempted rules by evaluation metrics: Out
of all the possible rules for achieving a subgoal, only a certain number
of these rules will be attempted. Therefore, some possible plans will be
missed.

e Precedence of satisfied states: Whenever a subgoal is satisfied by one or
more current states, planning rules for achieving those states are not considered.

© Precedence of existing analogical plans: If an analogical plan has already
been selected for a subgoal and the applicability of this analogical plan is
verified, other alternatives for this subgoal will not be generated. (However, if this subgoal fails, the entire analogical planning subtree will fail,
and alternative plans for achieving the subgoal at the root of the analogical
planning will then be considered).

Plans generated through action mutation thus are implicit in existing generic
rules and episodes. Nonetheless, such plans still might have not been found by
the analogical planning mechanism.
Although the above strategies have the advantage of preventing the program from performing an overly expensive search, they have the disadvantage
of sometimes causing the system to miss possible solutions. However, there is
considerable psychological evidence that people as well employ strategies for
reducing search which prevent them from seeing many possible solutions (J. L.
Adams, 1974; Wertheimer, 1945, pp. 169-192; F. C. Bartlett, 1932). The purpose, then, of such strategies as action mutation and serendipity is to counter

134

CHAPTER

the “mental blocks”
strategies.

5.4.2

5. EVERYDAY CREATIVITY IN DAYDREAMING

which sometimes

result from the use of search reduction

Strategies for Action Mutation

The following strategies are employed to mutate actions: permute objects, generalize object, and change action type.
The permute objects strategy juggles around object entities contained in the
action, such as persons and physical objects. For example, Harrison Ford tells
me his telephone number might be mutated into | tell Harrison Ford my telephone
number.
If there is only one object in an action, no mutations result from
this strategy. If there are two objects, there is one mutation: The objects are
switched. If there are three objects, there are five mutations. In general, there
will be n! — 1 mutations of an action containing n objects.
The generalize object strategy substitutes one of the object entities contained
in the action with an abstraction consisting of: (a) a variable whose type is that
which would normally fill the slot or slots containing the original element, and
(b) the requirement that the variable not be bound to the original element.
For example, Harrison Ford tells me his telephone number might be mutated into
Someone else tells me Harrison Ford’s telephone number or Harrison Ford tells
someone else his telephone number (as in RECOVERY2).
The change action type strategy modifies the type of the action and then
adjusts the fillers of the slots to be of appropriate type for the new action. In
the current version of DAYDREAMER, this mutation is only defined for actions
of type MTRANS, ATRANS, and PTRANS. For example, Harrison Ford tells
me his telephone number might be mutated into Harrison Ford gives me an object
containing his telephone number or Harrison Ford moves an object containing his
telephone number toward me. These mutations might lead, respectively, to daydreams in which the movie star gives his card to DAYDREAMER, or in which
the movie star accidentally leaves behind his wallet.
Arbitrary mutation of an action can lead to useless or nonsensical possibilities. In order to avoid spending too much time generating and exploring useless
possibilities, the serendipity mechanism is employed to evaluate generated mutations. The bottom planning rule for the intersection search is one having
a consequent subgoal which unifies with the mutated action. If serendipity is
successful, an episode suitable for use in analogical planning is created and the
mutated action is fleshed out through analogical application of that episode.

5.5

‘The Phenomena of Incubation and Insight

From the introspective reports of Poincaré, Helmholtz, and others, Wallas (1926)
abstracted four stages of the creative process: One sits down to solve a problem,

5.5.

THE PHENOMENA

OF INCUBATION AND INSIGHT

135

exerts much effort, but nonetheless reaches a stumbling block (the “prepara-

tion” stage). Then one takes a break—either a period of work on a different
problem or one of relaxation (the “incubation” stage). At some point, possibly
after resuming work on the original problem, a likely solution presents itself—
sometimes in a flash of insight (the “illumination” stage). Next one must verify
and complete the potential solution (the “verification” stage). One often has
the feeling that the break from the problem has allowed things to “settle” in
one’s mind, making it easier to find a solution the next time the problem is
examined. Wallas (p. 81) proposes that the four stages overlap in the daily
stream of thought as different problems are considered.
Several theories of this phenomenon have been proposed.
Poincaré
(1908/1952) proposes that the preparatory work mobilizes a collection of
“atoms” out of which a solution might be constructed, although one has not
yet been found. These atoms continue moving after one has stopped working
on the problem—they enter into various combinations with each other and with
other atoms which they happen to collide into. Eventually a good combination
occurs, which must always be verified through conscious thought. Hofstadter
(1983) implemented a similar molecular analogy in his JUMBO program for
finding English anagrams. Wallas (1926) proposes that nonconscious or “fringeconscious” work may be performed during incubation.?
Varendonck (1921) offers an explanation in terms of forgotten daydreaming activity: “Consciousness forgets all the preparatory work, retains only the
correct solution, and has rejected the numerous incorrect ones ...” (p. 140).
Woodworth and Schlosberg (1954) propose that when the thinker is blocked by
a false set of assumptions in the preparatory stage, incubation enables those interferences to drop away, allowing the thinker to find a more correct direction for
solution of the problem. Simon (1966) argues that the incubation phenomenon
may be explained in terms of familiarization and selective forgetting: In attempting to solve a new problem, working memory may be overloaded with the
many alternative, as yet unsuccessful, methods for solving the problem. During
this initial effort, however, information toward solution of the problem has been
added to long-term memory. When the problem is later reexamined with an
uncluttered working memory, solutions may be constructed from scratch with
the benefit of the new information in long-term memory. In this case, a solution
to the problem is more likely to be constructed right away.
Rothenberg (1979) suggests an explanation in terms of repression:

The creator is blocked on a problem because some conflict or anxiety
is involved in its unconscious meaning or structure. He turns away
from the task and, when in a relaxed ego state, he overcomes the
anxiety and solves the problem through creative cognitive processes.
3Theories of nonconscious work are to be distinguished from theories which refer to ori-

gins of creativity in the Freudian unconscious or in ungratified infantile wishes (S. Freud,
1908/1962; Kris, 1952; Rothenberg,

1979, p. 41).

136

CHAPTER 5. EVERYDAY CREATIVITY IN DAYDREAMING

Another contributory factor may be that the time lapse and distraction allows for inessential elements of the problem to drop away. (p.
400)

Our explanation of the illumination phenomenon—including the insightful
idea and corresponding emotion—is in terms of serendipity recognition during
daydreaming or processing of external input: At any time, DAYDREAMER is involved in several active concerns, each motivated by emotions. The concern with
the highest motivation is the one that runs, while other suspended concerns will
run as soon as the current concern is completed or if their motivation becomes
higher than that of the current concern, and still others are tentatively halted.
We hypothesize that human insight corresponds to the detection of a potential
solution or partial solution relevant to an active concern through serendipity
in response to input environmental objects and events, recalled episodes, and

daydreamed possibilities (such as mutations). ‘The potential solution is then incorporated into the concern. Our view is similar to Ericsson and Simon’s (1984,
pp. 162-164) hypothesis that insight results from direct recognition of existing
structures in long-term memory.

We hypothesize that the emotion which accompanies insight in humans is
necessary in order to divert attention to the new concern. A similar mechanism
is employed in DAYDREAMER: When a serendipity occurs involving a given
concern, a surprise emotion is attached to that concern as an additional force
of motivation, and the concern is made runable if it was not previously runable.
There is a potential problem: People are often unaware of any antecedent

thoughts responsible for the insight (Wallas,

1926, p.

95-96) analogous to

the real and imaginary objects and events which result in serendipity in DAYDREAMER. Perhaps one tends to focus on the new results and forget how they
were attained (James, 1890a, p. 260); perhaps the antecedent thoughts were
just below the level of consciousness (Varendonck, 1921, p. 213). In any case,
serendipity at least accounts for many instances of insight in which an internal
or external antecedent may be identified.
The value of incubation (waiting) and partial preparation may be explained
as follows: DAYDREAMER may perform some processing toward a concern and
then, before that concern is completed, switch to another concern (this occurs
when the emotional motivation of another concern becomes higher than the
motivation of the current concern, or the current concern seeks to perform an
external action and the system is not currently in performance mode). Since a
problem often may not be solved until more information is available, it is useful
to stop working on a concern until such a time as new information, stimuli, or
concrete objects for accomplishing a plan may be available. DAYDREAMER will
then later switch back to the original concern upon recognition that something
currently under focus is relevant to that concern (or if, for some other reason,
the motivation of that concern becomes greater than the motivation of all other
concerns). Therefore, the processing of a concern proceeds in an incremental

5.6.

PREVIOUS WORK IN PROBLEM SOLVING

137

fashion: A concern is performed for a while; then it is set aside in an intermediate
state; then that concern is taken up again starting from that intermediate state
when something relevant to that concern is discovered; the concern is set aside
again; and so on until the concern is completed. Each time the concern is
examined, the partial solution is revised—moved closer to a final solution in
light of the most recent information.
In addition, another incremental effect is achieved by the fact that previous
solutions are stored in episodic memory. When a solution is later attempted
for a similar or different problem, previous episodes are available as a starting
point.

5.6

Previous Work in Problem

Solving

Our view is that creative problem solving is often carried out by humans through
daydreaming. (Other ways of problem solving—such as working out a list of
actions on paper—are, of course, considered distinct from daydreaming.) In the
field of artificial intelligence, there has been much previous work on problein
solving (also called planning). In this section, we review some of this work and
compare it to DAYDREAMER.

5.6.1

GPS

and STRIPS

Early work in artificial intelligence (Feigenbaum & J. Feldman, 1963; Newell,
J. C. Shaw, & Simon, 1957) recognized the importance of search in solving
problems: A problem may be characterized by an initial state, a description of
a goal state, and a collection of operators for transforming one state into another. Solving the problem then consists of finding a sequence of operators for
transforming the initial state into a goal state. That is, a search is performed
through the problem space: The set of states reachable (via a sequence of operator applications) from the initial state. The GPS program (Ernst & Newell,
1969; Newell & Simon, 1972) introduced the technique of means-ends analysis:
Finding differences between the current state and the goal state and selecting
operators known to reduce those differences.
The STRIPS program (Fikes & Nilsson, 1971) views problem solving as a
process of search through the space of world models. That is, problem solving
is regarded as finding a sequence of operators which transform a given initial
world model into a world model in which a given goal is true.
DAYDREAMER can be viewed as conducting a search through the space of
scenarios. Each scenario consists of a sequence of events resulting in some world

situation (starting from some initial world situation) and represents a possible

solution—partial or complete—to a problem. One set of operators is similar to
means-ends analysis: apply a planning rule to achieve (reduce) an active subgoal
(difference). The similarity to GPS and STRIPS ends there. Further operators

138

CHAPTER

5. EVERYDAY CREATIVITY IN DAYDREAMING

are provided by all the mechanisms of DAYDREAMER
goal strategies to serendipity.

from the daydreaming

Specifically, DAYDREAMER differs from GPS and STRIPS in several important respects. First, DAYDREAMER addresses the problems of inaccessibility,
fanciful solutions, and accident: Consider a domain with a large number of operators, such as the domain of interpersonal relations and common everyday
occurrences. GPS and STRIPS, which conduct a search using a set of perfectly
accessible operators, fail as models of problem solving in such a domain. All
operators cannot be equally accessible at any point: In a computer program,
too many operators would overwhelm the system, while in a human, too many
operators would exceed the capacity of working memory.
Mechanisms must
therefore be employed to reduce the number of operators available at a time.
But as a result of such mechanisms, potential solutions may be missed. In order to find these missed solutions, additional strategies must then be employed
to uncover missed solutions, as well as to recognize when a missed solution
has accidentally been stumbled upon. These problems are addressed by DAY-

DREAMER: (a) available operators are pruned (via episodic rules, for example),
(b) existing solutions are perturbed to generate fanciful solutions (via mutation,

for example), and (c) accidental solutions are recognized (via serendipity).
Second, DAYDREAMER addresses the problem of multiple, ongoing goals:
GPS and STRIPS take as input a problem to be solved, solve the problem, and

then stop. Intelligent agents must be able to (a) recognize and anticipate problems on their own, (b) handle multiple problems, and (c) decide which problem
to concentrate on at any time. These issues are addressed in DAYDREAMER
through the use of personal goals, daydreaming goals, and emotion-driven control.
It is true that ongoing planning to achieve and maintain a collection of
internal goals may in principle be modeled in terms of the traditional search
paradigm for problem solving: For example, one might add formulas or rules
which imply certain internal goals in certain world models and a means for
directing the search in order to achieve those goals. However, classical work in
problem solving has not recognized and elaborated upon this possibility.

Third, DAYDREAMER addresses the role of experience: GPS and STRIPS
do not (a) use previous solutions to reduce search in generating new solutions,
or (b) use previous experiences to generate possible sequences of world events.
DAYDREAMER is capable of both through the mechanism of analogical plan-

ning:

(a) if a creative solution is found through serendipity, that solution is

stored so that the program does not have to chance upon the same sequence of
accidental events in order to generate that solution—or a similar one—in the fu-

ture; (b) previous experiences are used to generate continuations of an ongoing
daydream (as when Harrison Ford goes to Cairo in RATIONALIZATION1.)

5.6.

PREVIOUS

WORK IN PROBLEM SOLVING

139

ABSTRIP
GOAL

GOAL

GOAL

RELAXATION aN

of operator
Preconditions

successive
— successive REFINEMENT >

DAYDREAMER
GOAL

SERENDIPITY
successive
MUTATION

GOAL1

GOAL2

GOAL1

——_
generation of

FANCIFUL

as

=

scenarios

Figure 5.4: ABSTRIPS

5.6.2

vs. DAYDREAMER

ABSTRIPS

The ABSTRIPS program (Sacerdoti, 1974), which is based on STRIPS (Fikes &
Nilsson, 1971), employs the method of “hierarchical planning” to reduce search.
In this approach, a plan for achieving a goal is generated which ignores details
(such as how to satisfy operator preconditions); this plan is then used to guide
the generation of a plan at a finer level of detail; in turn, the resulting plan is
used to guide the generation of a plan at an even finer level of detail; and so on.
In contrast, the various strategies for the generation of fanciful scenarios in
DAYDREAMER—such as mutation and daydreaming goal strategies—actually

increase the amount of search (in order to discover hidden solutions). In DAYDREAMER, plans for achieving a goal are not successively refined into complete
plans, but rather are destructively altered into complete plans for achieving
that goal, or perhaps even some other goal. The difference between the two
approaches is illustrated schematically in Figure 5.4.

5.6.3

NOAH

The NOAH planning program (Sacerdoti, 1977) conducts a search through the
space of possible plans (or solutions) rather than through the space of world
models. Plans are represented as “procedural nets” which specify a partially
ordered sequence of actions at multiple levels of detail. “Critics” are responsible

140

CHAPTER 5. EVERYDAY CREATIVITY IN DAYDREAMING

for finding and correcting problems or redundancies (by reordering nodes or
eliminating actions) in a plan. For example, if the goal is to paint the ceiling and
NOAH will first expand this goal into two concurrent child
to paint the ladder,
and (2) paint the ladder. These nodes will be broken
ceiling
the
nodes: (1) paint

down further into two concurrent sequences: (la) get paint, (1b) get the ladder,
(1c) apply paint to the ceiling, and (2a) get paint, (2b) apply paint to the ladder.
The “resolve conflicts” critic will then notice that (2b) (applying paint to the
ladder) effectively deletes a precondition of (1c) (applying paint to the ceiling)—
that of having a ladder. The critic therefore modifies the procedural net so
that (1c) is performed before (2b). The “eliminate redundant preconditions”
critic combines (la) and (2a) into a single action. Other critics are called “use
existing objects,” “resolve double cross,” and “optimize disjuncts.” Domainspecific critics may be defined as well.
The critics of NOAH enable it to perform some advanced plan optimizations
which DAYDREAMER cannot perform. However, NOAH still suffers from the
problems described above regarding STRIPS and GPS. Although NOAH is able
to refine a slightly incorrect or incomplete solution incrementally, it is unable to
generate and exploit highly fanciful, distortive, or seemingly unrelated solutions
such as those obtained through mutation and the various daydreaming goal
strategies in DAYDREAMER.

5.6.4

PANDORA

One theory of problem solving which does not suffer from all of the shortcomings
of traditional views of problem solving is that of Wilensky (1983). His theory,
which is partially implemented as the PANDORA computer program (Faletti,
1982), is similar in many respects—but different in others—to DAYDREAMER.
The planner proposed by Wilensky consists of the following components: a
goal detector, plan proposer, projector, and executor. The goal detector activates
goals in appropriate situations; this is accomplished using situation-goal pairs
similar to the goal activation inference rules of DAYDREAMER. The plan proposer selects plans for achieving a goal. Specific plans have priority over more
general ones: If a proposed plan fails, a more general one is then attempted.
This is implemented by compiling rules into a hierarchy. The projector tests
a plan by simulating its execution in a hypothetical world—that is, by daydreaming. This is accomplished via a mechanism similar to that employed by
DAYDREAMER in daydreaming mode: The actions of a plan are asserted into a
hypothetical data base and the consequences of those actions, such as preservation goals, are noticed by the goal detector. Presumably, the goal detector may
employ a sequence of inferences in noticing a goal, just as in DAYDREAMER.
The executor carries out the actions of a plan as specified by a “task network.”
Wilensky’s emphasis is on general “meta-planning” in which knowledge
about the planning process itself is represented in the same form as knowledge of the domain. The same planning mechanism which constructs plans for

5.6.

PREVIOUS

WORK IN PROBLEM SOLVING

141

achieving goals in the domain may thus be used to achieve “meta-goals,” or goals
of the planning process. Meta-planning is not a focus of the present work; thus
meta-planning knowledge is simply hard-coded into the planning mechanism of
DAYDREAMER.

The operation of meta-planning in Wilensky’s theory of planning is illustrated in the following example: Suppose one has the goal of getting a newspaper from outside while it is raining. The plan proposer first selects the most
specific plan, that of going outside and carrying the paper back in. The projector then simulates the execution of this plan (as in daydreaming) and discovers
that it results in one getting one’s clothes wet. The goal detector thus activates a preservation goal to keep one’s clothes dry. Since this preservation goal
resulted from planning to achieve another goal (that of getting the newspaper), the RESOLVE-GOAL-CONFLICT meta-goal is activated to resolve
the conflict between these two goals.
The most specific plan for achieving this meta-goal is USE-NORMALPLAN, which selects a stored plan for resolving this specific type of goal conflict. Thus a plan for staying dry when going outside while it is raining, if any,
is selected. In fact, such a plan exists: putting on a raincoat.
However, if no such plan were found or if such a plan were to fail,
TRY-ALTERNATIVE-PLAN, the next most specific plan for achieving the
RESOLVE-GOAL-CONFLICT meta-goal, would be employed. This plan
involves selecting an alternative plan for achieving the initial goal which does
not contain an action which led (via one or more inferences) to the preservation
goal. Since going outside is an action which leads to the dryness preservation
goal, a plan not containing this action, if any, is selected. An example of such
a plan is getting one’s dog to fetch the newspaper.
A problem with this strategy, which Wilensky does not mention, is that a
stored plan might not specify all of the actions which will eventually be necessary
to realize that plan: In order to carry out an action of the plan, an unsatisfied
precondition of that action might first have to be achieved; this might in turn
require performance of some other action not specified in the original plan.
In general, carrying out a given plan may result in an arbitrarily deep tree
of subgoals. For example, in order to read a newspaper, the plan might be
to have physical control over the newspaper; in order to have physical control
over the newspaper, the plan might be to grab the newspaper; in order to grab
the newspaper, the plan might be to be near the newspaper; in order to be
near the newspaper, the plan might be to go to the location of the newspaper.
Thus the plan for reading the newspaper does not directly mention that one
must go to the location of the newspaper, since that is only one out of many
possibilities: Another plan for being near the newspaper, for example, might
be to ask someone to bring it to you. Thus the method for alternative plan
selection suggested by Wilensky does not work unless plans are stored in fully
expanded form. However, the number of possible expanded plans for each type
of goal is likely to be quite high: A combinatorial explosion results whenever

142

CHAPTER

5. EVERYDAY CREATIVITY IN DAYDREAMING

there is more than one plan for achieving each subgoal.
If TRY-ALTERNATIVE-PLAN is unsuccessful, a final strategy called
This plan involves finding
is employed:
CHANGE-CIRCUMSTANCE
states of the world which lead to the preservation goal and generating a plan
to alter those states. For example, if there is nothing between the rain and an
object, that object will get wet; a plan for avoiding getting one’s clothes wet
is therefore to place some appropriate object, such as a newspaper, in between
the rain and one’s clothes. The CHANGE-CIRCUMSTANCE strategy is
similar to our UNDO-CAUSES strategy for REVERSAL. Wilensky notes that
CHANGE-CIRCUMSTANCE is a method whereby stored plans for resolving specific goal conflicts (such as putting on a raincoat to keep from getting
wet) may be derived. However, unlike DAYDREAMER, plans derived via this
strategy are not stored for use in planning future similar situations—these plans
must be rederived each time. Thus Wilensky does not exploit the potential for
ongoing revision of plans (which we argued in Chapter 1 is important for creativity).
Unlike traditional problem-solving systems, but like DAYDREAMER, Wilensky’s planner infers its own goals. However, unlike DAYDREAMER, Wilensky’s
planner lacks a control mechanism for: (a) selecting which of many active goals
to form and execute plans for at any given time, and (b) interleaving the formation and execution of plans. Wilensky’s planner copes with multiple goals
in part through meta-planning: For example, meta-themes such as DON’T
WASTE RESOURCES result in efficient plans for achieving several goals.
However, although meta-planning can schedule the execution of a few goals,
it cannot in general schedule the execution of all future goals. Furthermore,
although time constraints on the execution of plans can in principle be handled
through meta-planning, some goals may be so urgent that there simply is no
time to perform such meta-planning. Consequently, a planner must have an
appropriate mechanism for interleaving the formation and execution of plans
for various goals and for directing attention to those current and future goals
that are deemed most important at any given time. Emotion-driven control is
the mechanism employed in DAYDREAMER.
Wilensky’s planner creates a task network through planning whose actions
are later executed. In DAYDREAMER, future plans or intentions are formed
and carried out via two mechanisms: (a) the generation, storage in memory,
and application, via analogical planning, of daydreamed plans, and (b) partial completion of a concern, suspension of that concern, and resumption of
that concern. The stored plans and suspended concerns of DAYDREAMER are
similar to Wilensky’s task networks, with the following significant difference:
Wilensky’s planner must construct a plan from scratch each time a problem is
encountered, even if that problem is similar to some previously solved problem,
while in DAYDREAMER, once a plan is formed, that plan may be applied to
any future similar problem.
The rules of DAYDREAMER provide a more economical representation of

5.6.

PREVIOUS

WORK IN PROBLEM SOLVING

143

planning knowledge that those of PANDORA. While in DAYDREAMER a single rule is used to represent the fact that performing a certain action results in
a certain goal state, in PANDORA two rules must be employed: one for representing the fact that that action may be employed as a plan for achieving a goal
whose objective is that state, and another for representing the fact that that
action results in that state. For example, the two PANDORA rules (Wilensky,
1983, p. 139):

(PlanFor
(Goal
(Goal
(Planner ?X) (Objective (At (Actor ?X) (Location ?L))))
(Action
(Drive-vehicle
(Driver ?X) (To ?L) (Vehicle ?V)))))
(Result
(Action
(Drive-vehicle
(Driver ?X) (To ?L) (From ?FL) (Vehicle ?V)))
(State
(At (Actor ?X) (Location ?L))))
may be expressed as the single DAYDREAMER
(RULE

subgoal

(DRIVE-VEHICLE

actor

?Person1

from

?Location1

to

rule:

?Location2

vehicle ?Vehicle1)
goal (AT actor

?Person1

obj ?Location2))

Furthermore, action preconditions, causal inferences, and the specification of
how a complex action—such as driving a car—is broken down into more simple
actions, are represented in their own unique way in PANDORA, while in DAYDREAMER each of these forms of knowledge is represented in the same way—as
a rule (with the exceptions that rules whose goal is an action have slightly different semantics, and that rules may be restricted to application only as a plan or

as an inference). This uniformity of representation in DAYDREAMER simplifies
the operation of the analogical planning mechanism employed in learning.
Both Wilensky’s planner and DAYDREAMER evaluate a scenario based on
the sum of the values of the goals in that scenario as well as according to crude
judgements of the plausibility of the scenario.
Wilensky presents advanced meta-planning techniques for handling forms of
goal competition, goal subsumption, goal concord, and goal overlap which are
not dealt with in the current DAYDREAMER.. In addition to the issue of plan
generation, Wilensky is concerned with the issue of plan understanding—that

144

CHAPTER 5. EVERYDAY CREATIVITY IN DAYDREAMING

is, how knowledge of planning may be used to explain the behavior of characters
in stories.
Wilensky does not describe his planner at a level of detail sufficient to enable one to implement the mechanism. It is not always clear which aspects
of his theory of planning have been implemented. In effect, DAYDREAMER,
as described in the present work, provides an explicit implementation of many
of the mechanisms only hinted at by Wilensky. Naturally, we are indebted to
Wilensky’s previous work.
In our view, daydreaming and problem solving are closely related phenomena; humans perform problem solving through daydreaming. Although Wilensky (1983) is “interested in how people work out a plan in mundane situations
...” (p. 7), he does not address many of the important aspects of human
planning which are dealt with in DAYDREAMER: the role of emotions and motivation, the role of episodic memory, the role of serendipity and mutation, and
the relationship between planning and learning.

5.6.5

Opportunistic Planning

An idea related to problem solving through serendipity is the idea of opportunistic planning (B. Hayes-Roth & F. Hayes-Roth, 1979). In opportunistic
planning, the planner takes advantage of world states which happen to be true,
thus (a) saving it the effort of achieving those states, or (b) enabling it to achieve
a goal that could not be achieved previously because those states could not be
attained at all. A similar exploitation of fortuitous states was accomplished in
PLANEX (Fikes, Hart, P. E., & Nilsson, 1972).
As illustrated in Figure 5.5, opportunistic planning is a special case of
serendipity. Whereas in opportunistic planning the world state must be identical to the subgoal objective, in serendipity the world state may be related to

the subgoal via (a) parameter substitution and (b) a chain of planning rules.
Opportunistic planning is the same
subgoal success.

5.7

Previous Work

as what we have been calling fortuitous

in Creativity

This section reviews previous theories of creativity implemented as computer
programs.

5.7.1

TALE-SPIN

The TALE-SPIN program (Meehan, 1976) generates simple stories in English
through the simulation of the goal-directed behavior of multiple characters.
The stories generated by TALE-SPIN are determined by various parameters
supplied as input: the characters of the story—such as fox, crow, ant, and

5.7.

PREVIOUS

WORK IN CREATIVITY

145

TARGET

Serendipity
subst
—_—_——»_-

subgce

Opportunistic
planning

Tule conn

:
equiv
———— >

SOURCE

ae

world

UDS

state

Ora

subgoal

world

Figure 5.5: Opportunistic Planning vs. Serendipity

canary—one of which is designated as the main character, a problem of the
main character—such as hunger or thirst—which becomes the motivating topic
of the story, physical objects such as breadcrumbs, cheese, berries, and water,
personality traits and relationships of the characters, beliefs about the traits of
other characters, and the initial knowledge states of the characters.
The functions of daydreaming and writing stories are quite different:
Whereas daydreaming is a private activity concerned mostly with personal learning and emotion regulation, an author writes a story to entertain, inform, or
otherwise communicate with the reader. A daydream is a production of the moment; it is generated on the fly; it wanders freely from topic to topic and need
not be comprehensible to others. A story, on the other hand, is a deliberate,
finished product intended for others; it is determined in part by the literary or
artistic goals of the writer.
Nonetheless, daydreams are often story-like (consider revenge daydreams,
for example), just as stories are often daydream-like (consider the later works
- of James Joyce, for example). The similarities in content between stories and
daydreams arise because daydreaming is one source of ideas for stories, or, for
that matter, any creative output.
What similarities and differences are there between DAYDREAMER, a program intended to address stream of consciousness thought, and TALE-SPIN,
a program intended to address story generation? The basic generation mechanisms of the two programs are rather similar: Both employ planning, forward

inferencing, and planning by one character to modify the mental states (and thus
behavior) of other characters. Facts in TALE-SPIN’s global, objective data base
represent physical states of the world and beliefs of each of the characters. In
DAYDREAMER, all facts in a context are beliefs of the daydreamer; some of
those are beliefs about the physical world, while others are beliefs about the

146

CHAPTER 5. EVERYDAY CREATIVITY IN DAYDREAMING

beliefs of other persons. If one views the global data base of TALE-SPIN as the
beliefs of the storyteller, the distinction almost dissolves. The one difference
is that the “storyteller” in DAYDREAMER—the daydreamer—is permitted to
have goals and carry out actions in the world. In TALE-SPIN, planning and
inference rules are represented as Lisp procedures rather than in a declarative
form such as that employed by DAYDREAMER.
In DAYDREAMER, only the daydreamer is able to simulate hypothetical
future events and make decisions based on those simulations. In TALE-SPIN,
each character is able to perform limited hypothetical simulations: Specifically,
the consequences of performing an action may be simulated in order to decide whether or not to perform that action. This is accomplished by running
forward inferences of an action in a hypothetical data base from the point of
view of a given character. However, this mechanism does not simulate the further planning behavior of other characters, as in the forward other planning
of DAYDREAMER. Furthermore, since this mechanism is invoked to evaluate a
single action, it does not enable debugging of the larger plans in which those
actions are embedded. Thus characters in TALE-SPIN do not perform detailed
rehearsal in order to plan for future events analogous to that of DAYDREAMER.
Since the output of the global simulation performed by TALE-SPIN is intended to be a story rather than a daydream, this simulation is never rolled

back in order to consider alternative possibilities. In order to generate different
stories, one simply runs the program again. The course of each story in TALESPIN is determined exclusively by the initial goals, traits, and relationships of
the characters. That is, there is nothing in TALE-SPIN analogous to daydreaming goals and emotions for directing the course of the simulation according to
some higher-level purpose, such as a point which the author wishes to convey to
the reader in the case of story generation. Even if TALE-SPIN were abie to roll
back in order to produce alternative stories it would have no criteria by which
to evaluate those alternatives. It takes a reader to appreciate any serendipitous
sequences of events which may be generated by TALE-SPIN; these go unnoticed
by the program, which merely simulates. Thus TALE-SPIN is quite limited as
a model of creativity.
TALE-SPIN does not address the following other issues dealt with in DAYDREAMER: learning from experience, episodic memory storage and application
(which is critical to the revision of stories), future plan formation and use, regulation of emotional state, and motivation by emotions.

5.7.2

AM

and EURISKO

Lenat’s (1976, 1983) AM program explores new mathematical concepts under
the direction of a collection of heuristic rules. Rather than generating proofs,
AM produces mathematical conjectures which it tests empirically. The control
mechanism for AM is based on an ordered list of tasks, called an “agenda.” Each
task contains a list of reasons for performing that task (such as “there is only

5.7.

PREVIOUS WORK IN CREATIVITY

147

one known generalization of primes so far”) and associated numerical values.
Although the reasons are called “symbolic,” the only semantic information derived from a reason is whether it is identical or different to another reason—this
enables the system to assign low value to duplicate reasons. The priority of a
task is calculated as a function of these values, as well as values associated with
the task’s action, slot, and concept. The control mechanism consists of repeatedly picking the highest priority task off the agenda and executing it, subject
to time and space resource limitations.
Although in DAYDREAMER the motivating emotions (corresponding to resolved goals) of daydreaming goal concerns might be considered as “reasons,”
the assignment of priorities is not in general based on reasons. Rather, priority
is initially determined by goal activation rules containing intrinsic importances,
and later modified as a result of serendipity, rationalization, and side-effect personal goal successes and failures which occur in the concern. A similar effect to
that of AM is achieved in that concerns of greater “interest” are concentrated
upon.
The exploratory activity of AM involves the fortuitous discovery of new concepts and relationships inherent in the initial set of concepts and heuristics. For
example, the concepts of addition and multiplication, which arise via different
routes, are later noticed to be related (specifically, AM notices that n+n = 2n).
Since everything in AM can be considered a serendipity, the notion of serendipity becomes diluted. Unlike DAYDREAMER, AM cannot trigger a serendipity in
response to external input. AM has no fixed goal other than to explore concepts
and relationships which it finds interesting. Serendipity in DAYDREAMER, on
the other hand, seeks to model serendipity in human daydreaming, and is thus
concerned with finding relationships which have an impact on active personal
and daydreaming goals chosen from a fixed set (however, other mechanisms
and strategies—such as fanciful planning, other planning, daydreaming goals,
and mutation—enable the program to generate a variety of fanciful daydream
scenarios which may have no direct application to any particular personal goal).
The major differences between AM and DAYDREAMER result from their
dissimilar domains and tasks: AM seeks to discover new concepts in the domain of mathematics, while DAYDREAMER seeks to discover new plans in the
domain of events in the world involving people and their relationships. Like
DAYDREAMER, AM has a “dynamic memory” (Schank, 1982)—it modifies its
memory in a way that affects future behavior. However, the memory of AM contains concepts (consisting of definitions, examples, generalizations, operations,
and so on), while the memory of DAYDREAMER contains episodes or sequences
of previous real or imaginary world actions and states.
Much of the success of AM in finding new mathematical concepts was due
to the fact that the characteristic functions of concepts were represented as Lisp
code and that syntactic mutations on this code—such as elimination of AND
clauses, changing an AND to an OR, and so on—turned out to yield mostly
useful new concepts (Lenat & J. S. Brown, 1984): the Lisp representation was

148

CHAPTER 5. EVERYDAY CREATIVITY IN DAYDREAMING

ideally matched to the mathematical domain. The interpersonal domain of DAYDREAMER presents a more difficult problem in representation and discovery
using those representations than the mathematical domain of AM—reasoning
about world events is more complex than reasoning about mathematical objects and operations: In the mathematical domain, an experiment yields definite results—for example, if a concept’s definition predicate returns true when
applied to an object produced by an experiment, it is known with complete certainty that the object is an instance of that concept. However, the results of an
experiment conducted in the interpersonal domain of human daydreaming are
not definite—asking a person out on a date, for example, can have any number
of responses depending on whether the person is interested, is currently involved
with someone, is free that night, and so on. Furthermore, even an experiment
carried out in the external world is not assured of definite results: If one is
turned down after asking someone out on a date, one might not know why one
was turned down.
In general, the interpersonal domain is far less formal and certain, and more
complicated as a result of its concern with the mental states (beliefs, attitudes,

goals, and emotions) of others (and other events in the external world). Finding
a correct and complete set of rules for this domain would be tantamount to a
complete unraveling of human cognition. Given our current state of knowledge
on this topic, we have to settle for part of the story in DAYDREAMER.
Once AM had built up many higher-level concepts, the heuristics it had were
no longer very useful in the resulting domain. That is, it had no common sense
about number theory and tried, for example, to discover numbers that were
both odd and even. EURISKO (Lenat, 1983) is a descendant of AM which is
able to discover new heuristics. Initial heuristics given to the program are in fact
heuristics for discovering heuristics. However, some heuristics for mathematical
functions turned out to be applicable to heuristics as well. For example:

IF the results of performing f are only occasionally useful
THEN consider creating new specializations,of f
Discovery of heuristics in EURISKO would correspond in DAYDREAMER to
the discovery of new strategies for daydreaming (such as daydreaming goals
and meta-plans), which is left as a topic for future research.

5.7.3

BACON

BACON (Langley, Bradshaw, & Simon, 1983) is a program which discovers
empirical laws. The strong point of BACON is its ability to induce compact
formulas which characterize a set of numerical data using domain-independent
heuristic rules. However, BACON is not particularly successful as a model of
human creative processes. For example, although BACON discovers Archimedes
law of displacement, it arrives at this formula via a path quite unlike that which
Archimedes is supposed to have taken. As the legend goes, Archimedes was

3.7.

PREVIOUS

WORK IN CREATIVITY

149

entering the tub to take a bath when it dawned on him
that the volume of
the displaced water is equal to the volume of his submerged
body (Langley,
Bradshaw, & Simon, 1983, p. 315). This somewhat accident
al discovery is
similar to the object-driven serendipities modeled by DAYDREAMER
. In contrast, BACON models the discovery simply by taking as input
a collection of
numerical data and inducing a formula which fits those data. BACON
has no
representations for water, objects, containers, or displacement.

hope

ch

;

aon RCL

lsat

Alascahioat ah glidatngdis seine sre

ares AMODAR seiniepbert) aiid sae eaten raion
egopse dhe were _ategeilepsh teArana
stone teas
ney

bat Lie ritipart YS autoarnwe
of

tip: OMEN; 7

Waegrrlviciie| int, srergiene
finite

:

etki

4 io yt

Ranantp enn rat

weomenr:
iA)

pee

te (ue

Hout Se
4

ak ia dem,

sippier

T Sai 5 ~omm

ost!
eth

=~ ant
eh uw

val «iinet aE ii ee

ryt

cle \iS
ara =e

tevi cmmrred

ot

' sats

One

aik =

an ea

ee

i

rf MeN

(eficl

rt nied rae (

; sertcne

warn

Sry

les

Nar

af win ng

iz. exe
aa

= Dae AM td
na litaees

=p

ain hiltitmts

say

ipa

&

Gal)

Avbe i> «fee

ey

pat peters
=pfee

Gwe

-

ae
DHToulyrrs
‘ in

5j

ay
ryé

6o-iae
theater)

by

>

tei

;

tint

or

Oh'

Lilie

bite

Pra

v i

0

D

ad

rT wit

a

a

7

‘thie
we

16 Ae

pareagTarr

7

heyy

5

Watley ee

Foe agent”
{

*

wed a)

j

-

aie as

—-

ies ;

aoe

rrepnid

ta LAjteHe ANS

’ '

ifWAT lis

-

ive

a

(teary ne

foNeat

:

>

+)

———*

a)

:

45 9

mara bale

—e
a

= 0p ae],

a+

i

inallan
an

Li‘ ‘uf 1“
ti

preepclwer— Bete

CPi
a

ane

f\

aeale

Laer

oe

;

‘

rs

ui

4

tion

us atte

|t$)
eDavn ? (CAs

men
>!ati a

wpralicat¢

ul

ha

rar cite

é

ee

t

Y tiveb a)

-

_

'
——

ro

—
ae

.

eee

2

a

we

«it

~a

a ~ », whet he wsevtee i haa:

=

'

rt Oy ter
)

;

E8120

a min

ibsensth

‘

:

“~

nMaf

eae

/

a

artes. tire
as
x
=

2

iw sy tsme
ey sciuts Iv

(heWen

yat

pcoie

-

hs is

Wag

fixe

ee

al

coer t

—titior Ove

Neil wean

cr

eater)

(an

of evil Pr)

ites

rarer “uj ds —
a

—

7

i

cif jis ccuvtesti vituh th sutns si siaton (hediafa

_

>

fa

mags

eefe torpersonal dopesin = tar leg fartnal iy
div eri

7
ralphiaages
——a
——>

3

it
Gnterestvit &

—— mage pateeptcy >>

vies <i,

_

. >) in pee

fir ampenye. (aG-0

1°40 night. and <6 ob

the

due Yah

Ow

jour

wen

in

.
.

|

ind

rh

nt

von
|

of

U

side.

;

shine
iy

|

.

Ww

IN

i

alfa

ri

whem
=

may
;

mo)

Na

'

a&

We

Te

el way

ve et

bats UtPng

ARNE

meg?

ity

all

waAas pms pirate
12 ie

tea
ay +)

coma
4

date: a

iy) os
:

ize
:

it

: mf
vt wr

4

sain

Chapter 6

Daydreaming in the
Interpersonal Domain
In order to daydream in a certain content area, DAYDREAMER must have an
in-depth representation of that area. People daydream about a variety of things
from everyday concerns to technical matters to unlikely science-fiction-like adventures. Some of the more common topics of daydreaming are human relationships, sexual activities, good fortune, career achievement, heroic feats, hostility,

and guilt (J. L. Singer & Antrobus, 1972). We have singled out the natural and
frequent daydream topics of interpersonal relations (J. L. Singer & McCraven,
1961)+ and employment for detailed representation in DAYDREAMER.

Dyer (1983a) and Schank and Abelson (1977) have previously addressed the
representation of interpersonal relationships (such as friends, lovers, and so on)
for use in story understanding. Although the representations for understanding
and planning overlap to some degree (Wilensky, 1983), the emphasis is different:
Previous research in story understanding has been concerned with tracking existing relationships between story characters in order to generate expectations
for connecting up the events of a story. In contrast, we address how an individual takes actions in order to initiate, maintain, and terminate relationships

with others. We also provide an implementation of Heider’s (1958) analysis of
attitudes—positive or negative evaluative judgments toward a person, object,
or idea—which are important in interpersonal relations.
In this chapter, we first review the representation of simple states, mental
states, and actions. Second, we discuss extensions to the basic planner required
for planning in the interpersonal domain. Third, we discuss the representation
1 Although the domain of interpersonal relations might be taken to include erotic fantasies,
which are a common aspect of daydreaming (Stoller, 1979; Hariton & J. L. Singer, 1974;
Friday, 1973; J. L. Singer & Antrobus, 1972), this level of representation is beyond the scope
of the present work.

152 CHAPTER 6. DAYDREAMING

of attitudes.

IN THE INTERPERSONAL DOMAIN

Fourth, we discuss the representation of interpersonal relation-

ships. Fifth, we present some strategies for generating fanciful scenarios in the
interpersonal domain.
It should be pointed out that the representation elaborated here presents a
somewhat simplified and idealized view; this is also true of other current artificial
intelligence representations of natural phenomena. Some readers may find our
representations too stereotypical to capture the richness of what is probably the—
most complicated, varied, pleasurable, and difficult area of human experience:
human relationships.? However, the purpose of constructing representations
is in fact to capture certain generalizations—stereotypes—which humans have,
both in order to construct theories of human cognition and in order to construct
intelligent computer programs. The representations provided here are a first
approximation to these stereotypes.

6.1

Basic States and Actions

The basic representation in DAYDREAMER

for states and actions in the world

is based on Schank’s (1975; Schank & Abelson, 1977) conceptual dependency
(CD) representation. In this section, we review CD and present extensions to
CD employed in DAYDREAMER.

6.1.1

Conceptual Dependency

Representation

CD was originally developed to enable computer programs

meanings of English sentences (Schank, 1975).

to represent the

There are two types of CD

conceptualizations (often referred to simply as CDs): actions and states. An
action CD consists of a primitive action, an actor (the animal performing the
action), an object (the animal or physical object on which the action is being
performed), a direction of the action (including origin and destination), and an
optional instrument for the action. A state CD consists of a state, a current
value of that state, and an object (which is in the given state with the given
value). CD conceptualizations are connected via causal links (dependencies).
Some primitive actions of CD (Schank & Abelson, 1977) are:

ATRANS The abstract transfer of possession, by an animal, of a physical object from one animal to another; an abstraction of giving, taking, buying,
selling, and so on.
MTRANS The mental transfer of information, by an animal, from an animal or physical object to an animal; an abstraction of talking, reading,
gesturing, and so on.
?Quinn (1981) presents some alternatives to the goal subsumption model of relationships
(Schank & Abelson, 1977) adopted here.

6.2.

OTHER PLANNING

153

PTRANS
The physical transfer from one location to another, by an animal or
physical object, of an animal or physical object; an abstraction of walking,
driving a car, riding a bicycle, and so on.

6.1.2

Conceptual Dependency in DAYDREAMER

DAYDREAMER employs a modified conceptual dependency representation for
states and actions. The functional behavior of representations in the program
is specified by planning and inference rules such as the following:
IF
THEN

ACTIVE-GOAL
ACTIVE-GOAL

for person to be AT location
for person to PTRANS
to location

This rule states that in order to achieve the state of being AT a particular
location, one employs the PTRANS action to go to that location; conversely, if
one PTRANSes from one location to another, one is then AT the new location

and no longer AT the original location.
follows:
IF
THEN

ACTIVE-GOAL
ACTIVE-GOAL

PTRANS

is further broken down as

for person to PTRANS to location
for person to KNOW location

That is, in order to PTRANS to a particular location, one must KNOW
where that location is.
In DAYDREAMER, mental states of persons are called beliefs. A belief consists of an actor—the person whose mental state is described, and an object—
the mental state. The mental state may itself be the mental state of another
person—yet another belief. One typical use of beliefs is the representation of
mental states of others which refer to the mental states of the self—such as
Harrison Ford believing that DAYDREAMER has the goal to go out with him.
Most often, beliefs are used to represent the attitudes and goals of others.

6.2

Other Planning

Daydreaming in the interpersonal domain often involves other planning—
monitoring and attempting to modify the mental states (attitudes, goals, and
so on) of other persons. We distinguish between forward and backward other
planning.
Forward other planning involves running the planning mechanism from the
viewpoint of another person. This enables the program to determine in a given
situation what inferences that person might make, what beliefs that person
might form, what goals that person might initiate, what actions that person
3A belief of another person is actually a belief of DAYDREAMER about the belief of
another person. However, since all representations in the program are assumed to be beliefs
of the daydreamer, this extra level is ignored in the discussion for simplicity.

154 CHAPTER

6. DAYDREAMING

IN THE INTERPERSONAL

DOMAIN

might take on behalf of those goals, and so on. That is, forward other planning
provides a simulation of the behavior of another person. For example, when

DAYDREAMER imagines she is going out with Harrison Ford in RATIONALIZATION1, DAYDREAMER predicts that the movie star will have the goal to
work and thus will travel to Egypt to shoot a film.
Backward other planning involves attempting to achieve some mental state
in another person. For example, in LOVERS1, DAYDREAMER has a goal to go
out with the movie star; in order to achieve this goal she must plan for the star
to have the goal to go out with her.
In order to perform (both forward and backward) other planning, DAYDREAMER must have a model of the inference rules, planning rules, and initial
mental states of other persons. The general assumption is made that the behavior of others is similar to the behavior of DAYDREAMER. This enables an
economical representation of rules for both personal and other planning. However, rules may be added and deleted from this basic set for particular persons
or classes of persons. Thus, for example, movie stars may have a different set
of goals than DAYDREAMER.
The mental states of other persons are maintained in the same planning contexts as those containing self mental states; any mental state of another person

is marked as a belief of that person. In order to perform forward other planning
for a person, the planning algorithm described in Chapter 7 is employed. How-

ever, this algorithm (a) only retrieves beliefs of the other person and (b) marks
as beliefs of the person any newly asserted subgoals or facts. The algorithm
is sufficiently general to handle the simulation by another person of another

person (including the self), the simulation by another person of the simulation
by yet another person of yet another person, and so on. However, such nested
planning is avoided in DAYDREAMER since it rapidly leads to a deep regress.
Backward other planning is employed in the following situation: Suppose
a goal exists whose objective is some mental state of another person.
The
program has two ways of achieving this goal: Either it can employ a rule stated
in terms of another person having the given mental state, or it can employ a
rule stated in terms of the self having the given mental state. The former is
attempted first, and then the latter is attempted. In the latter case—backward
other planning—the rule is applied as if the other person were the self.

6.3

Attitudes

An attitude is an evaluation or generalized judgment made by a person of a
physical object, another person, or an idea. Attitudes are important in the
interpersonal domain, since the behavior of people is guided by their attitudes.
If, for example, a person has a negative attitude toward another person, then
the person is less likely to assist the other person in achieving that person’s
goals. It is insufficient, however, merely to model the impact of attitudes on the

6.3.

ATTITUDES

155

behavior of a person. In addition, it is necessary to model how a person models
the attitudes of others, and how this modeling in turn affects that person’s
behavior: We are often concerned with the attitudes of other persons toward us
and frequently behave in order to manipulate those attitudes (Goffman, 1959).

In this section, we address: (a) the representation of attitudes, (b) the formation of attitudes, (c) the monitoring of the attitudes of others, and (d) the
modification of the attitudes of others.

6.3.1

Basic Attitude Representation

The representation of attitudes in DAYDREAMER

is based on previous work by

Heider (1958) (who calls them “sentiments”). While emotions (such as anger
directed toward an object) have a short duration, attitudes are stable dispositions toward objects. Attitudes may be classified into positive and negative
attitudes. A POS-ATTITUDE toward something means liking that something;
a NEG-ATTITUDE means disliking it. There is a special positive attitude called

ROMANTIC-INTEREST® as well.
A taxonomy of attitudes has been constructed by Schank, Wilensky, Carbonell, Kolodner, and Hendler (1978). However, their emphasis is on the inferences which can be made on the basis of attitudes in the comprehension of
stories, rather than on the relationship of attitudes to behavior. As a result, the
set of attitudes which they propose is too large for our purposes—a sufficiently
difficult problem is presented by only positive, negative, and romantic attitudes.
Attitudes are mental states. Because all mental states are those of the
daydreamer, an attitude by itself represents a self mental state. An attitude of
another person is represented as a belief containing an attitude. However, for
simplicity, we use “person has a POS-ATTITUDE toward an object” to mean
“a BELIEVE of person that POS-ATTITUDE toward object.”

6.3.2

Assessing, Forming, and Modifying Attitudes

In social psychology, there are a number of similar cognitive balance theories
which contend that the attitudes which a person holds tend to proceed toward

balance: Festinger’s (1957) theory of “cognitive dissonance,” Heider’s (1958)
“preference for balanced states,” the “principle of congruity” of Osgood and
Tannenbaum (1955), as well as other related theories. Heider (1958, pp. 174217) discusses various cases of this principle, some of which are encoded as rules
in DAYDREAMER. Each rule has several functions: The rule may be employed

(a) as an inference rule in the formation of the attitudes of DAYDREAMER,
(b) as a planning rule for DAYDREAMER to achieve certain self attitudes, (c)

4This attitude might have been called the LOVE attitude, but since DAYDREAMER
concentrates on modeling the initial phase of a relationship, the term more appropriate to
this stage is employed.

156 CHAPTER 6. DAYDREAMING

IN THE INTERPERSONAL DOMAIN

as an inference rule for the monitoring of the attitudes of others, and (d) as a
planning rule for the modification of the attitudes of others.
According to Heider (1958), a person will tend to like another person having
similar beliefs and attitudes. Thus in DAYDREAMER we have the rule that
people tend to like those who like the same people and things they do:
IF
THEN

ACTIVE-GOAL to have POS-ATTITUDE toward person
ACTIVE-GOAL for person to have POS-ATTITUDE
toward something that self has POS-ATTITUDE
toward

Thus, for example, if one likes Indian food, one tends to like other people
who also like Indian food. Since people tend to like themselves and aspects
of themselves, the above rule also implies that one person will tend to like a
second person who likes the first person or an aspect of the first person. Another
consequence of the above rule is that if one person likes a second person, the
first person tends to believe that the second person likes the first person.
Another principle is that a person will tend to like a similar person and

dislike a dissimilar person (Heider, 1958): “Birds of a feather flock together.”
That is, one will form a positive attitude toward others with similar personality
traits (e.g., social class, appearance) and a negative attitude toward those with
dissimilar personality traits. An instance of this principle is provided by the
following DAYDREAMER rule which states that well-dressed rich people do not
like others who are not well-dressed:
person is RICH and
self is AT same location as person and

self not WELL-DRESSED
person has NEG-ATTITUDE

toward self

How is the attitude of ROMANTIC-INTEREST generated and modified? In
DAYDREAMER we will simply assume that a certain level of this attitude may
be generated if one has a positive attitude toward the other person, and one
finds the other person attractive in appearance; we assume the ROMANTICINTEREST attitude may be strengthened if the constituent positive attitude
and attractiveness are strengthened, as well as through continued success of a
LOVERS relationship. We have the following rule:

THEN

ACTIVE-GOAL
person
ACTIVE-GOAL
and

to have ROMANTIC-INTEREST
to have POS-ATTITUDE

in

toward person

person to be ATTRACTIVE

In order to get another person to have a particular personal goal, one must
achieve the antecedents of the rule which activates that goal. For example, the
following rule states that a goal to be LOVERS with someone is initiated if one

has ROMANTIC-INTEREST
with someone else:

in that person and one is not currently LOVERS

6.3.

ATTITUDES

THEN

ACTIVE-GOAL
of LOVERS with
ACTIVE-GOAL
and
ACTIVE- GOAL

157
for self to have ACTIVE-GOAL
person
for ROMANTIC-INTEREST in person
for not LOVERS

with anyone

Although this rule is stated in terms of the self rather than another person,
it can still be applied to another person through backward other planning.

6.3.3

Attitudes and Meeting People

In order for DAYDREAMER to form a FRIENDS or LOVERS relationship, she
must meet people. In this section, we investigate how one person approaches
another when the two are not already acquainted. That is, we explore the
situations in which is it acceptable for one person to initiate communication
with another, and how acceptable “opening lines” are produced.
The ACQUAINTED relationship in DAYDREAMER models the fact that
two people know each other. This relationship has the inference that whenever
the two persons meet, each will recognize the other and say hello to the other.
Being acquainted with someone is a prerequisite to forming a more important
FRIENDS or LOVERS relationship with the person.
In DAYDREAMER, two become acquainted when they have participated in
an M-CONVERSATION:

IF
THEN

ACTIVE-GOAL
ACTIVE-GOAL

to be ACQUAINTED with person
for M-CONVERSATION with person

The M- prefix is from Schank (1982) and refers to a complex action made up
of more primitive actions. Thus, an M-CONVERSATION consists of a series of
exchanges, where each exchange is one or more MTRANSes by the first person
followed by one or more MTRANSes by the second person.
If two persons are not already ACQUAINTED, there are certain constraints
on the first MTRANS which initiates the conversation—the MTRANS from the
first person to the second person must be acceptable to the second person, which
means:

e the second person does not form a negative attitude toward the first person
e the second person does not believe that others (or society) would form a
negative attitude toward the second person if the second person failed to
behave as if the second person had a negative attitude toward the first

person.
That is, it is acceptable to initiate communication with someone if neither oneself nor the other person is embarrassed as a result.
The acceptability criteria are encapsulated under a state called MTRANSACCEPTABLE which may or may not exist between two individuals in a given

6. DAYDREAMING

158 CHAPTER

IN THE INTERPERSONAL

DOMAIN

situation. A conversation is then achieved if MTRANS-ACCEPTABLE
of the two persons and if each person introduces oneself to the other:°

THEN

is true

ACTIVE-GOAL for M-CONVERSATION between person1
and person2
ACTIVE-GOAL for MTRANS-ACCEPTABLE between
personl and person2 and
ACTIVE-GOAL for personl to MTRANS INTRODUCTION
to person2 and
person2 to MTRANS INTRODUCTION to person1

However, if one person MTRANSes to another without the state MTRANSACCEPTABLE, the other will form a negative attitude toward the first:
not MTRANS-ACCEPTABLE between personl and
person2 and
person! MTRANS anything to person2
person2 has NEG-ATTITUDE toward person1l

What, then, are the criteria for MTRANS-ACCEPTABLE?

That is, what

determines whether the second person forms a negative attitude (or believes
that such an attitude should be formed) toward the first person? Such attitude
formation is sensitive to the particular goal context in which the communication occurs, as well as the particular existing attitudes and traits of the persons
involved. In general, a negative attitude will not be formed (and the communication will be acceptable) if the communication is performed as a subgoal of
some goal situation which the two people have (or are contrived to have) in
common.
DAYDREAMER contains various planning and inferences rules for MTRANSACCEPTABLE. For example, a request for a small favor, such as the time, is
an acceptable initial communication:

THEN

ACTIVE-GOAL for MTRANS-ACCEPTABLE
self and person
ACTIVE-GOAL for self to MTRANS to person
that self has ACTIVE-GOAL to KNOW the time

between

In DAYDREAMER, communication is also acceptable with another person
if (a) one is already acquainted with that person, (b) that person has already
spoken to the self, (c) that person already has the goal to be acquainted with

the self (as is inferred in the situation of a party), and (d) if the other person
smiles at the self.
°The subgoal for MTRANS-ACCEPTABLE is not strictly (causally) necessary for
achievement of the goal. It is introduced to prevent certain negative consequences. That is,
although a conversation really requires only the exchanges themselves, if an initial communication by one person is deemed unacceptable by another, that party will form a negative
attitude toward the first person. Therefore an additional subgoal is added to the rule to pre-

vent formation of such a negative attitude. When actions to prevent negative consequences
are not already compiled into a rule, the REVERSAL daydreaming goal may be used to
create new rules in which such actions are compiled in; see Chapter 4.

6.4.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS

159

6.4

Interpersonal Relationships

There

are

DREAMER:

three

interpersonal

FRIENDS,

relationships

LOVERS,

currently

and EMPLOYMENT.

represented

in DAY-

Two persons may go

through a sequence of relationships over time: For example, they may start out
as FRIENDS, which is terminated by the two becoming LOVERS, which then
is terminated by the two becoming FRIENDS, and so on. In general, there may
be more than one relationship between two persons—for example, the same two
persons could participate in both a FRIENDS and an EMPLOYMENT relationship. However, not all combinations are possible. In our scheme, LOVERS
subsumes FRIENDS so both relationships should not be present between two
people at a given time.

6.4.1

Lovers

The LOVERS relationship consists of the following phases:
nance, and termination.

initiation, mainte-

Once a personal goal to form a LOVERS relationship with someone is activated, this goal may be achieved by: (a) being acquainted with a person, (b)
being romantically interested in the person, (c) the person having the goal to

be in the relationship, (d) going on a date with the person, and (e) agreeing
to initiate the relationship. These steps are expressed as the following planning
rule in DAYDREAMER:
ACTIVE-GOAL

for LOVERS

ACTIVE-GOAL
ACTIVE-GOAL
and
ACTIVE-GOAL

for ACQUAINTED with person and
for ROMANTIC-INTEREST in person

of LOVERS

with person

for person to have ACTIVE-GOAL
with self and

ACTIVE-GOAL

for M-DATE

and
ACTIVE-GOAL
to LOVERS

with self and person

for self and person to M-AGREE

It would be possible to introduce a loop into the planning: the M-DATEs
would continue until the two parties agreed to form the more permanent
Since DAYLOVERS relationship (or decided they were not interested).
DREAMER does not represent a great variety or degree of detail of the activities
performed on a date, a loop would just add more repetition to the traces. Therefore, only one M-DATE is performed before initiating a LOVERS relationship
in the current system.
and ROMANTICWe have discussed planning for ACQUAINTED
that a person will
states
rule
Another
section.
previous
the
INTEREST in
the first person is
if
person
another
with
relationship
a
have the goal to initiate
is not currently
person
first
the
and
person
second
the
in
romantically interested
in a relationship:

160 CHAPTER 6. DAYDREAMING

IN THE INTERPERSONAL

IF

ACTIVE-GOAL

THEN

of LOVERS with person
ACTIVE-GOAL for ROMANTIC-INTEREST
and

ACTIVE-GOAL

DOMAIN

for self to have ACTIVE-GOAL

for not LOVERS

in person

with anyone

This rule, although stated in terms of the self, is employed through the backward other planning mechanism to plan for a person other than DAYDREAMER.

An M-DATE
activity

toward

in DAYDREAMER

consists of:

which

have

both

parties

(a) agreeing to perform an

a positive

attitude

(such as

M-

RESTAURANT or M-MOVIE), (b) enabling future MTRANSes (in order to
arrange meeting time and location), (c) at a later time going to the other person’s home, (e) performing the activity (including going to an appropriate location to perform the activity), (f) going back to the other person’s home, and
(g) kissing each other. This is expressed as the following rule:
ACTIVE-GOAL
ACTIVE-GOAL

for M-DATE with self and person
for self and person to M-AGREE
to M-RESTAURANT with self and person and
ACTIVE-GOAL for self and person to ENABLE-FUTURE-VPROX
and
ACTIVE-GOAL for it to beFRIDAY-NIGHT and
ACTIVE-GOAL for self to be AT location of
person and
ACTIVE-GOAL for M-RESTAURANT with self and
person and
ACTIVE-GOALE for self and person to be AT
initial location of person and
ACTIVE-GOAL for self and person to M-KISS
and
ACTIVE-GOAL for self to be AT initial location
of self

An agreement to perform an activity or initiate a state for the mutual benefit
of the parties results when the parties MTRANS the fact that they have the
same goal to each other:

THEN

ACTIVE-GOAL for self and person to M-AGREE
to thing
ACTIVE-GOAL for self to MTRANS to person
that self has ACTIVE-GOAL for that something
and
ACTIVE-GOAL for person to MTRANS to self

that person have ACTIVE-GOAL

for thing

The LOVERS relationship consists of the following conditions and inferences:
(a) each party supports various goals of the other, (b) each party maintains a
ROMANTIC-INTEREST attitude toward the other, and (c) each party is not in
a LOVERS relationship with another (and especially must not engage in M-SEX
with another).

6.4.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS

161

Violations of requirements activate preservation goals on the relationship.
For example, the following rule is employed in RATIONALIZATION to generate 2 preservation goal on the relationship when Harrison Ford leaves Los
Angeles.
IF

LOVERS with person who is RPRO®X
eM is not RPROX city

THEN

ACTIVE-P-GOAL

of LOVERS

city and

with person

If the requirements of the relationship are violated sufficiently, one or both
parties may decide to terminate the relationship:
ACTIVE-GOAL
for FAILED-GOAL of POS-RELATIONSHIP
with person
ACTIVE-GOAL for person to MTRANS to self
that person has ACTIVE-GOAL not to be in
POS-RELATIONSHIP with slf

THEN

This rule applies to any positive relationship (i.e., FRIENDS, LOVERS, and

EMPLOYMENT).
6.4.2

Friends

A PRIENDS relationship is achieved whenever two people are acquainted and
they have positive attitudes toward each other:

THEN

6.4.3

ACTIVE-GOAL
ACTIVE-GOAL
and
ACTIVE-GOAL
and
ACTIVE-GOAL
toward self

for FRIENDS with person
for self and person to be ACQUAINTED
to have POS-ATTITUDE

toward person

for person to have POS-ATTITUDE

Employment

The EMPLOYMENT relationship is initiated in the following manner: (a) an
employer has an opening, (b) an employer wants a particular employee for the

job, (c) the employee wants the job, and (d) the employer and employee agree
to the job. These steps are expressed in terms of the following rule:
IF
THEN

ACTIVE-GOAL

for EMPLOYMENT

with person

ACTIVE-GOAL for person to have ACTIVE-GOAL
of employing someone and
ACTIVE-GOAL for person to have ACTIVE-GOAL
of employing self and

ACTIVE-GOAL for self and person to M-AGREE
of self with person
to EMPLOYMENT

162 CHAPTER 6. DAYDREAMING

IN THE INTERPERSONAL

DOMAIN

One can quit and one can be fired; this is accomplished via the rules given
above for termination of LOVERS. In addition, one’s job fails if one is not
living in the same region as the city in which one is employed (this rule is
employed in RATIONALIZATION1 to generate failure of employment upon
following Harrison Ford to Cairo):
have EMPLOYMENT
with organization which is
RPROX city and
self is not RPROX city
FAILED-GOAL of EMPLOYMENT with organization

6.5

Strategies for Fanciful Planning

Consider the following hypothetical (but typical) daydream, given by S. Freud
(1908/1962), of a poor orphan boy on his way to see an employer where he
might find a job:

He [daydreams that he] is given a job, finds favour with his new
employer, makes himself indispensable in the business, is taken into
his employer’s family, marries the charming young daughter of the
house, and then himself becomes a director of the business, first as
his employer’s partner and then as his successor. (p. 148)
In this daydream, the goals most important to the orphan—to be employed,
to have a family, to be married, to be the director of a business—are achieved
without considering all of the necessary planning steps and obstacles. He does
not imagine knocking on the employer’s door, the opening of the door, talking

with the employer about a job, being offered (or refused) a job, accepting the
job, performing the activities of the job each day for many days, and so on. Furthermore, he ignores the likely behavior of the employer, family, and daughter
as well as his own probable limitations.
Planning in daydreaming relazes constraints: A constraint relaxed in the
above daydream is the probable behavior of other people. Another constraint
often relaxed in daydreaming is the identity or attributes of the self. One might
imagine being a famous movie star (as in REVENGE1), an Olympic athlete,
or even a physical object or animal. Often physical constraints are relaxed in
daydreaming: One might imagine being able to fly, being invisible, being able to
slide underneath doors, and so on. Finally, social and cultural constraints may
be relaxed as when one imagines yelling “fire!” in a crowded movie theater.
In one daydream, one might imagine walking around in Paris without considering the plane trip required to get there. But after seeing a news report
on terrorism, one might daydream about the plane trip itself. How does DAYDREAMER, determine when to relax a constraint and when to omit details?
Three strategies are employed in DAYDREAMER for the generation of fanciful daydream scenarios in the interpersonal domain: plausible planning, subgoal
relaxation, and inference inhibition. We consider each of these methods in turn.

6.5.

STRATEGIES FOR FANCIFUL PLANNING

6.5.1

163

Plausible Planning

Daydream scenarios which are not completely realistic may be generated
through the use of plausible planning and inference rules (Shortliffe & Buchanan,
1975). Associated with each rule is a number from 0 to 1 which roughly specifies how plausible that inference or planning rule is. A somewhat fanciful daydream scenario results whenever an inference or planning rule is employed whose
plausibility is less than 1. For example, DAYDREAMER employs the following
plausible planning rule in generating REVENGE1:
IF
THEN

ACTIVE-GOAL
ACTIVE-GOAL

for self to be STAR
for self to M-STUDY

to be an

ACTOR

This rule, which states that one may become a star by studying to be an
actor, is assigned a plausibility of 0.4. The realism of a scenario, also measured
on a scale from 0 to 1, is calculated based upon the plausibilities of the planning
and inference rules employed in generating that scenario. The particular values
are not important. What is important is that (a) rules not guaranteed to succeed

may be employed in planning, (b) some rules are more likely to succeed than
others, and (c) numbers can be used to provide a rough measure of scenario
realism.
For any given subgoal, there may be several applicable plausible planning
rules. How does DAYDREAMER decide which rules to employ and in what
order to attempt each of these rules? When planning for personal goals and
learning daydreaming goalsk—REVERSAL, REHEARSAL, RECOVERY, and
REPERCUSSIONS—rules are attempted in order of decreasing plausibility.
When planning for emotional daydreaming goals—RATIONALIZATION, REVENGE, and ROVING—rules are attempted in random order. Furthermore,
when planning for personal goals and learning daydreaming goals, a rule is only
selected if its application would result in a scenario whose realism is above a certain level. This level is higher for personal goals than for learning daydreaming
goals. Such a restriction is not imposed on emotional daydreaming goals. Thus
personal goals result in the most realistic scenarios, learning daydreaming goals
result in moderately realistic scenarios, while emotional daydreaming goals may
result in fairly unrealistic scenarios.
Assessment of the realism of a daydream scenario is important since daydreams are potential plans for future action. If a particular daydream contains
unrealistic world events in response to actions of the daydreamer, it should not
be employed in the world; in performance mode it does not matter what the
imagined positive consequences of the daydream are if those consequences are
derived from an unrealistic scenario. If DAYDREAMER failed to make realism
assessments, it would act on its unrealistic daydreams and be disappointed with
the results—that is, its personal goals would fail.

164 CHAPTER 6. DAYDREAMING

6.5.2

IN THE INTERPERSONAL

DOMAIN

Subgoal Relaxation

In addition, fanciful daydream scenarios may be generated by hypothesizing the
success of an unsatisfied subgoal without generating a plan—even a plauszble
plan—to achieve that subgoal. Such subgoal relaxation is performed in the following situations:

e All plans to achieve a subgoal have failed and the objective of the subgoal
is either: a mental state (e.g., goal, attitude, belief) of another or a self
attribute (e.g., appearance, social class). Examples occur in LOVERS1,
in which DAYDREAMER assumes Harrison Ford is interested in her and
thinks she is attractive.
e A daydreaming goal strategy (implemented as rules) explicitly specifies
that the success of a given subgoal is to be hypothesized. Here the purpose
of a daydream, as specified by the current daydreaming goal, determines
which subgoal success to hypothesize. For example, one plan for the RATIONALIZATION of a past goal failure involves hypothesizing the success
of that saine goal, without worrying about how that goal might have been
achieved.
Subgoal relaxation, by itself, is similar to the relaxation of operator preconditions employed in ABSTRIPS (Sacerdoti, 1974). See Chapter 5 for a review of
ABSTRIPS in the full context of DAYDREAMER.

6.5.3.

Inference Inhibition

In addition, fanciful daydream scenarios may be generated by failing to infer negative consequences of a situation. In particular, social or cultural consequences
(such as being embarrassed or being thrown in jail) are ignored whenever a special daydreaming goal® is invoked to explore a socially or culturally unacceptable
goal (such as causing chaos or stealing). For example:
I’m sitting on the deck of Pacific Princess with lots of people swimming and sun-bathing not far away from me. A waiter comes around
passing out desserts. Then someone gives a signal and everybody

starts throwing food all over the place. (McNeil, 1981)
I imagine myself as the notorious bank robber who is wanted by the
law everywhere. I’m entering a majestic bank full of security guards.
I still carry out my plan and achieve my goal despite ... the security

network. (McNeil, 1981)
Daydreams produced using inference inhibition have low realism values, so
that they are not acted upon in performance mode. Alternatively, inferences
®This daydreaming goal is not yet implemented in the current version of DAYDREAMER.

6.5.

STRATEGIES FOR FANCIFUL PLANNING

165

can be turned on during generation of socially unacceptable actions; although
the realism of such a scenario may then be high, the desirability evaluation
of the scenario will be low because of its negative consequences. Thus such a
daydream will also not be acted upon in performance mode.
Inference inhibition probably occurs in humans only after a person has
learned which actions are socially unacceptable through daydreaming without
inference inhibition. Thereafter, the generation of such daydreams simply serves
as a form of self-entertainment (J. L. Singer, 1975). Generation of negative consequences would reduce the entertainment value of such daydreams.

&

7

ie vetoes
Prete 0d)
i.

‘onri)

Pi

-

a

Sak pe

sade Put

:i) ai> vied er
a

:

:

:

1

ets

,

N

P|

ier nee
in ar ha‘Veg ten swibben

:
1
_- Very a iest dsatenils stdat fyaaaarnat
ie
ad
aly
‘.
yieeyirasl rea thaw bn aySts

tra

oh )

eS as tee, Bern

ates ben, ute io ashe, Japaringa38 ; nett ll '
v

7

<a
& @in@aainune-<
ey
.. be are
af

)

—_
ax,

—

;

|

edarinan\

:

:

in "aes

.

OMic

ij vee!

athal,

aa

-

up raL wen

> “BF

tye

ny

4

off

=>

of

¢

Pay

L) Cachine
|

t het

ee

@

erie the plemmg goal Ges

al

i Wierctne

Toe
T
~
parted
»

:

7 Migs + Tl
a

eprriid

Ge Miled) epeiealy

(eS her
ext

“yi pei

thes bin

2p

io

jurw

jriady FG

e

at

t

thr

—

“

. eae

f

¢iut

id mish

—

Al

Nw

‘

$
45

‘

Shia

el

lov oakHanae "
« 7 gecitie

ma

Ad by

-

-

ss

=«@

J

ad

—

oT)
Vv?

‘

t

"

:

<

——

:

f
C8 eT

Wikest

:

is

es:

‘

i

mes

7

1

ie

4

=

a

7

:
; noix
fe)

‘
ee

ime

el ¢

iu }

r

4

ie

yd

ta

; rie

vom

ine

128

z

i

@ an

i

a

}

ral

(rt ph

yeh

i@

"

&

he

G

net

;

i}

| Oe GOR

y Pah

4 ie

“~

AA

7

>»

F

‘

i

ald

ca

vi

is
il

Chaba

ey

itedtwee

Ti. Aeris

—

n*

| Absa ide

On
aT)

oe

a
>=

buy dou fiay reid, Uf
4 vegwnsed

)

-

eee

————

<

=

7

7

-

,

-

@

a

e

=

'

_

ores stady Rchne

;

=

-

'

a

——

:

|

f

=a.4eir

—_

;

>

:

btelli ha, Jr

in “re

a

at

:
a

ate

ih

——

ge

-

Lhe

4

WOerent

ad

_

te

;
satan!

ae

Frey,

(npeesintend

cmzot;

\erraric iy
=e

a

7

a

i wnteon
moa
7.
iT

wai

4

Loy

a

Kiurlien Sued by eee

erm

OREAUER

heh Os

be

iy

Chapter

7

Implementation of
DAYDREAMER
This chapter describes the implementation of DAYDREAMER in detail: First, we
present statistics on the program. Second, we present the GATE representation
language. Third, we discuss the representation of DAYDREAMER planning and
inference rules in this language. Fourth, we discuss the basic procedures for
daydreaming. Fifth, we revise these basic procedures to incorporate analogical
planning and episodic memory. Sixth, we discuss the modifications necessary to
support forward and backward planning from the viewpoint of others. Seventh,
we discuss the procedures for serendipity and mutation.

7.1

Summary

Statistics

DAYDREAMER consists of 12,739 lines of code, broken down by major sections
as follows:
Component

TControl

Lines

~eeevewe 717,

Planner
Episodic memory
Reversal
Serendipity
Mutation
Misc
Generator
Representations
Total

2186
915
553
762
447
1315
2122
SA
12,739

A large percentage of the code is devoted to the planner and the representations and planning knowledge for the interpersonal domain. The rest of the
167

CHAPTER

168

7. IMPLEMENTATION OF DAYDREAMER

components are relatively compact.
DAYDREAMER consumes 2,521,088 bytes of memory - Gmeeeprered yiin T version 3.0 on an Apollo DN460. This figure does not include the GATE language,

which consumes 346,112 bytes of memory (compiled).
A number of statistics on the program were obtained from the traces of a
complete run; annotated trace excerpts are provided in Appendix A.
The following statistics were obtained for the planner:
Event
Rule firings
Context sprouts
Planning rule firings
Inference rule firings
Subgoal relaxations

Count
322
186
186
136
15

Input states/actions

6

Output actions
Side-effect personal goals

20
8

The planning rule firings broke down as follows:
Type

Count

Percentage

130
44
9
3

69.9 %
23.6 %
4.8 %
1.67 %

Regular planning rules
Analogical planning rules
Coded (Lisp) planning rules
Backward other planning rules

Thus almost one quarter of the planning rule applications were carried out
through analogical application of a planning episode. There were four serendipities, and one mutation.
The following statistics were obtained for concerns:
Event
Initiation

Count
22

Success
Failure

15
4

The program switched from daydreaming mode to performance mode four times,
and switched from performance mode to daydreaming mode three times.
The following statistics were obtained for episodic memory:
Event
Stored episodes
Retrieved episodes
Activated indices

Count
12
8
71

Sixteen hand-coded episodes were initially provided to the program.
After
adding 12 more episodes, the program contained 28 episodes.
Five new planning rules were added to the program’s collection of rules. The
program ended up using two of them later on.

7.2.

THE GATE REPRESENTATION LANGUAGE

169

The distribution of rule utilization was as follows:

Times Used

Number of Rules

22
20
12
10
9
ff

1
2
1
1
1
3

Believe-plan1
Mtrans-plan2 At-plan2
Ptrans-plan
Enable-future-vprox-plan1
Vprox-plan2
Vprox-plan3 Vprox-plan1 Mtrans-plan1

i)
4

6
10

Rprox-plan M-phone-plan1 M-agree-plan
Romantic-interest-plan Reversal-theme

3
2
1

8
31
52

Know-plan2 Employment-theme-plan
Under-doorway-plan Reversal-plan
Well-dressed-plan2 Star-plan

Sample Rules

A total of 116 rules were used; 114 of those rules were initially provided to
the program. Since the program was provided with 135 rules initially, 21 rules
ended up never being used.

7.2

The GATE

Representation Language

DAYDREAMER is implemented using GATE (E. T. Mueller, 1987a; E. T.
Mueller & Zernik, 1984), a graphical artificial intelligence program development tool for the T language (Rees, N. I. Adams, & Meehan, 1984), a version of
the Scheme dialect of Lisp (Winston & Horn, 1981; McCarthy, Abrahams, Edwards, Hart, & Levin, 1965), running on Apollo Domain and Hewlett-Packard
Bobcat workstations.
GATE consists of slot-filler objects, a textual representation for these objects,
operations on these objects such as unification, instantiation, and variabilization, and a context mechanism. GATE also includes a graphical interface which
provides visual animation of a running program as it manipulates slot-filler objects, and enables one to create, view, and modify objects graphically.

7.2.1

Slot-Filler Objects

Slot-filler objects are similar to the slot-filler objects of Schank and Riesbeck
(1981), frames (Minsky, 1975), Lisp a-lists (McCarthy et al., 1965), and the
structures or records of traditional programming languages such as Pascal
(Wirth, 1971).

Slot-filler objects consist of: (a) one or more object names, (b) a type, and
or more pairs, where each pair consists of a slot name and a slot value.
zero
(c)
Object names and slot names are Lisp atoms. Types are organized into a hierarchy; types are themselves slot-filler objects. A slot value is either a slot-filler
object or some other Lisp object (such as a character string or a procedure).
Several pairs with the same slot name are permitted.

CHAPTER

170

7. IMPLEMENTATION OF DAYDREAMER

Basic operations which can be performed on slot-filler object include: create,
add-name, get-names, set-type, get-type, add-slot-value, remove-slot-value, getslot-values, copy, and so on.
A textual representation for slot-filler objects enables printing to.and reading
from a terminal, window, file, string, or Lisp list. For example:
(PTRANS

actor John1
from

(RESIDENCE

obj John1)

to Storel
obj John1

Mary1)

The slot-filler object represented above is of type PTRANS and consists of
five pairs. One pair of the object consists of the slot name actor and slot value
John1. This slot value refers to another slot-filler object whose name is John1.
Whenever a slot value is a slot-filler object having a nonautomatically generated
name, only the name is printed. The slot value of the pair whose slot name is
from is another slot-filler object which does not have a name. In this case, the
full textual representation of this slot-filler object is recursively printed. There
are two pairs of the top-level slot-filler object whose slot name is obj. The slot
value of one pair is John1 while the slot value of the other is Mary1.

7.2.2

Unification

Unification (see, for example, Charniak, Riesbeck, & McDermott, 1980) is a
pattern-matching operation performed on two slot-filler objects. The objects
may contain a special kind of slot-filler object called a variable. Two slot-filler
objects unify if values for variables can be found such that substituting the
values for those variables in the objects would produce equivalent structures.!
For example, if unification is invoked on
(PTRANS

actor ?Person
to ?Location)

and
(PTRANS

actor John1
to Storel)

the result is the following list of variable bindings:
?Person
?Location

=

Johnl
=

Storel

1 Actually, the structures resulting from substitution do not have to be equivalent. Rather,
one structure must be a substructure of the other: one slot-filler object unifies with another
if each pair in the first object unifies with a unique pair in the second object; however, each
pair in the second object need not have been accounted for. Thus unification in GATE is
asymmetrical.

7.2,

THE GATE REPRESENTATION LANGUAGE

Al

Unification takes two objects and an initial list of bindings, normally empty,
and returns an augmented list of bindings if the two objects unify. Three cases
involving variables in unification must be considered: First, an unbound variable
unifies with a slot-filler object if the object is an instance of the type of the
variable. A variable of type TYPE may be represented as either of the following:
?name: TYPE
?Type...

When an unbound variable successfully unifies with an object, that object
becomes that variable’s value in the list of bindings. Second, a bound variable
unifies with an object if the value of that variable unifies with the object. Third,
two variables unify if the type of one variable is an improper supertype of the
type of the other.
GATE provides an extended syntax and semantics for unification. In particular, it supports several special slot-filler objects of type UAND, UOR, UNOT,
and UPROC:
(UAND

obj obj1 obj 0bj2...)

A UAND object unifies with another object if all of 0b71 0b72 ... unify with
that object. Bindings are augmented in a cumulative manner from each unification.
(UOR obj obj1 obj 0bj2...)

A UOR object unifies with another object if any of 0b71 0bj2 ... unifies with
that object. Bindings are augmented by the first successful unification.
(UNOT

obj 0bj)

A UNOT object unifies with another object if obj does not unify with that
object. Bindings are not augmented.
(UPROC

proc proc)

A UPROC object unifies with another object if proc (a Lisp lambda expression) applied to that object returns a non-NIL value. Bindings are not
augmented.
These features were inspired by the pattern matcher of the DIRECTOR

language (Kahn, 1978). We have extended the constructs to full unification—

that is, the constructs may now be used in both arguments to the matcher, with
a, well-defined semantics. We have also added appropriate extensions for typed
variables and slot-filler objects, multiple slot values per slot name, and cyclic

data structures. E. T. Mueller (1987a) discusses the GATE unification language
in greater detail.

CHAPTER

172

7.2.3.

7. IMPLEMENTATION

OF DAYDREAMER

Instantiation

Instantiation (see, for example, Charniak, Riesbeck, & McDermott, 1980) takes
a slot-filler object and binding list, and returns a copy of the object in which any
variables have been replaced by their values in the binding list. For example, if
the slot-filler object:
(PTRANS

actor ?Person
to ?Location)

is instantiated using the binding list:
?Person

?Location

=

Johnl

=

Storel

the returned slot-filler object is:
(PTRANS

actor John1
to Store1)

Any unbound variables remain as variables in the copy. The slot-filler object
may contain other slot-filler objects-—-the complete structure with the given
object as root is copied, with any cycles preserved in the copy.

7.2.4

Variabilization

Variabilization (see, for example, Charniak & McDermott, 1985) takes a slotfiller object, a predicate, and a procedure, and returns a complete copy of the

slot-filler object (with cycles preserved) in which any enclosed objects answering
true to the predicate have been replaced by unique variables of a type determined
by applying the procedure to the object. Multiple occurrences of the same object
will become the same variable. For example, given:
(PTRANS

actor John1
to Storel
obj John1

Mary1)

and an appropriate predicate and procedure, variabilization returns:
(PTRANS

actor ?Person1
to ?Location1
obj ?Person1 ?Person2)

7.2.5

Contexts

A context is a collection of slot-filler objects—called facts—which specify the
state of a possible world. GATE contexts are similar to other context mechanisms such as OMEGA viewpoints (Barber, 1983) and AP3 contexts (Goldman,
1982), all of which derive from the original contexts of QA4 (Rulifson, Derksen,
& Waldinger, 1972).

7.3.

PLANNING AND INFERENCE RULES

173

Several operations may be performed on contexts: The create operation
returns a new context containing no facts. The assert operation adds a fact to
a context. The retract operation removes a fact from a context. The retrieve
operation returns: (a) a list of facts in the context unifying with a given retrieval
pattern,” and (b) the corresponding variable bindings. The sprout operation
creates a new context which is a copy of an existing context. Initially, the new
context consists of the same collection of facts as the old context. Thereafter,
if the new context is modified, the old context remains unaffected.2 The new
context is called a child of the old context; the old context is called the parent
of the new context; we also speak of ancestor and descendant contexts.
For example, suppose that the following two objects are asserted into a newly
created context:
(PTRANS

actor John1
to Store1)

(PTRANS

actor Mary1
to Storel)

A retrieval from this context using the pattern:
(PTRANS

actor

?Person

to Store1)

will return the first two slot-filler objects, and the following two binding lists
which correspond to those objects:
?Person

=

John1l

?Person

=

Maryl

and

7.3.

Planning and Inference Rules

DAYDREAMER planning and inference rules are represented in the GATE language as follows:
(RULE subgoa! subgoal-pattern
goal goal-pattern
delete delete-pattern1 delete-pattern2 ...
emotion emotion1 emotion2 ...
is ?INFERENCE-ONLY

| ’?PLAN-ONLY

| ?>ACTION-PLAN

| ?GLOBAL-INFERENCE

plausibility number)
2Hashing on the types of facts is employed in the current version of GATE to improve the
efficiency of this operation.
3We do not specify whether modifications to the old context affect the new context, since
the procedures which we will present here do not modify the old context once a new context
has been created.

CHAPTER

174

7. IMPLEMENTATION

OF DAYDREAMER

The delete, emotion, is, and plausibility slots are optional. By default, a rule
may be employed both as a planning rule and as an inference rule. However, if
the is slot of the rule is ?Inference-only, the rule may be employed only as
an inference; if the is slot of the rule is ’Plan-only, the rule may be employed
only as a plan.

7.3.1

Planning Rules

When a rule functions as a planning rule, the goal slot specifies the antecedent
and the subgoal slot specifies the consequent. That is, if the objective of an active
goal unifies with goal-pattern, the active goal may be split into the subgoals
whose objectives are specified by subgoal-pattern, instantiated with the bindings
resulting from the unification with goal-pattern. Specifically, if subgoal-patiern
is of the form:
(RSEQ obj subgoal-pattern1 subgoal-pattern2 ...)

then subgoal-pattern1, subgoal-pattern2, and so on, suitably instantiated, are
the subgoals. Otherwise, subgoal-pattern, suitably instantiated, is the subgoal.
Here is a sample planning rule employed in DAYDREAMER:
Rule Lovers-plan

(RULE subgoal (RSEQ obj (ACQUAINTED

actor ?Self ?O ther)

(ROMANTIC-INTEREST
(BELIEVE

obj ?0ther)

actor ?Other

obj (GOAL obj (LOVERS

actor ?Self ?0 ther)))

(M-DATE actor ?Self ?O ther)
(M-AGREE actor ?Self ?O ther

obj (LOVERS
goal (LOVERS

actor ?Self ?Other)))

actor ?Self ?0 ther)

is ?’PLAN-ONLY

plausibility 0.95)

THEN

7.3.2

ACTIVE-GOAL
ACTIVE-GOAL
ACTIVE-GOAL
and
ACTIVE-GOAL
of LOVERS with
ACTIVE-GOAL
and
ACTIVE-GOAL
to LOVERS

Inference

for LOVERS with person
for ACQUAINTED with person and
for ROMANTIC-INTEREST in person

for person to have ACTIVE-GOAL
self and
for M-DATE with self and person
for self and person to M-AGREE

Rules

When a rule functions as an inference rule, the subgoal slot specifies the antecedent and the goal slot specifies the consequent. That is, whenever subgoalpattern is shown to be true in a given context for some collection of bindings, the

7.3.

PLANNING AND INFERENCE RULES

175

instantiated goal-pattern is asserted in that context and the instantiated deletepattern1, delete-pattern2, and so on, if any, are retracted from the context. If
subgoal-pattern is of the form:
(RAND

0bj subgoal-pattern1 subgoal-pattern2 ... )

or

(RSEQ obj subgoal-pattern1 subgoal-pattern?2 ... )

then all of subgoal-pattern1, subgoal-pattern2, and so on, must be shown to be
true in the given context. If subgoal-pattern is of the form:
(ROR obj subgoal-pattern1 subgoal-pattern2 ...)

then one of subgoal-pattern1, subgoal-pattern2, and so on, must be shown to be
true in the given context. Finally, if subgoal-pattern is of the form:
(RNOT

obj subgoal-pattern1)

then subgoal-pattern1 must not be shown to be true in the given context. RAND,
ROR, and RNOT are to be distinguished from their counterparts UAND, UOR,
and UNOT. A RAND, for example, is shown to be true if each of its elements
matches some, possible different, fact in the context; a UAND in the same
position would require each of its elements to match the same fact in the context.
Here is a sample inference rule employed in DAYDREAMER:
Rule Neg-attitude-inf

(RULE subgoal (RAND

obj (RICH actor ?0ther)
(AT actor ?Other
obj ?Location)

(AT actor ?Self
obj ?Location)

(MTRANS

actor ?Self
from ?Self
to ?Other

obj ?Anything:NOTYPE)

(RNOT obj (WELL-DRESSED
goal (BELIEVE

actor

actor ?Self)))

?Other

obj (NEG-ATTITUDE

obj ?Seif))

is ? INFERENCE-ONLY

plausibility 0.9)
person is RICH
self is AT

and

same location as person and

self not WELL-DRESSED
person has NEG-ATTITUDE

7.3.3

toward self

Rules for Actions

Inference rules are commonly used to specify the effects of actions. For example,
DAYDREAMER employs the following inference rule for PTRANS:

7. IMPLEMENTATION

CHAPTER

176

OF DAYDREAMER

Rule At-plan

(RULE subgoal (PTRANS

actor ?Person
from
to

?Location1

?Location2

obj ?Person)

goal (AT actor ?Person

obj ?Location2)
delete (AT actor

?Person

obj ?Location1)
initial (AT

actor

?Person

obj ?Location1)

plausibility 1.0)
IF
THEN

IF
THEN

person PTRANS from location1 to location2
person AT location2 and
delete person AT location1

ACTIVE-GOALE
ACTIVE-GOAL

|

for person to be AT location
for person to PTRANS to location

This rule specifies that when a person performs a PTRANS, it is necessary
to retract the old location (AT) of the person and assert the new one.
The above rule may also function in reverse as a planning rule: When an
AT goal is present, a PTRANS subgoal may be asserted. Such action subgoals
are treated similarly to other subgoals—the preconditions of the action become
further subgoals to be achieved. For example, DAYDREAMER employs the
following rule for PTRANS:
Rule Ptrans-plan

(RULE subgoal (KNOW

actor ?Person
obj

goal (PTRANS

?Location2)

actor ?Person
from

?Location1

to ?Location2
obj ?Free-obj)

is ’ACTION-PLAN

plausibility 1.0)
IF
THEN

ACTIVE-GOAL
ACTIVE-GOAL

for person to PTRANS to location
for person to KNOW location

Once the KNOW subgoal succeeds—that is, once the person knows the location being PTRANSed to—the action is performed (asserted as an action into
the appropriate context). Since it is an undesirable behavior for an action to be
performed whenever its preconditions happen to be satisfied, rules whose goal
is an action are not run as forward inferences.
Some rule must correspond to each possible action goal. If there are no
preconditions for a given action goal, the corresponding subgoal should be:

(RTRUE)
Only one rule should apply to each action goal and each rule should contain
all the necessary preconditions for any action goal to which that rule applies.

7.3.

PLANNING AND INFERENCE RULES

7.3.4

Rules for Concern

177

Initiation

A new concern is initiated by an inference rule (called a theme, after Schank &

Abelson, 1977) of the following form:
(RULE subgoal activation-condition
goal (ACTIVE-GOAL obj goal-objective)
emotion (POS-EMOTION strength emotion-strength)

is *INFERENCE-ONLY)
When activation-condition is shown in the context, a new concern is initiated
whose top-level goal is specified by the goal slot. The emotion slot specifies
motivating emotions to be instantiated and associated with the new concern.
Here is a sample rule employed in DAYDREAMER for initiating an EMPLOYMENT personal goal concern:
Rule Em ployment-theme

(RULE

subgoal

(RNOT

obj (EMPLOYMENT

goal (ACTIVE-GOAL

actor

?7Self))

obj (EMPLOYMENT

actor 7Self 70 ther
organization

emotion (POS-EMOTION
is 7 INFERENCE-ONLY

strength

7Organization))

0.85)

plausibility 1.0)

self not have EMPLOYMENT with anyone and
satisfaction level of MONEY or POSSESSIONS
need below threshold
ACTIVE-GOAL for EMPLOYMENT with person

Here is a sample rule employed in DAYDREAMER
NALIZATION daydreaming goal concern:

for initiating

a RATIO-

Rule Rationalization-theme

(RULE

subgoal (DEPENDENCY

linked-from
linked-to

goal (ACTIVE-GOAL
emotion

?Failed-goal

(UAND

obj ?Neg-emotion

(UPROC proc ’>THRESH7)))
obj (RATIONALIZATION 0b) ?Failed-goal))

7Neg-emotion

(NEG-EMOTION

strength

0.05)

is ’ INFERENCE-ONLY
plausibility 1.0)

NEG-EMOTION of sufficient strength resulting
from a FAILED-GOAL
ACTIVE-GOAL for RATIONALIZATION of failure

CHAPTER

178

7. IMPLEMENTATION OF DAYDREAMER

Emotion-driven control

Planner

Rule application

Inference rule application

Concern termination

Planning rule application

Concern initiation

Figure 7.1: Basic Procedure Dependencies

7.4

Basic Procedures for Daydreaming

DAYDREAMER, in its basic form, is built out of seven procedures, whose dependencies are shown in Figure 7.1. The top-level emotion-driven control procedure
repeatedly selects the most highly motivated concern, and invokes the planner
on this concern. The planner invokes rule application to carry out one step
of planning for the concern. If the top-level goal of the concern succeeds or
fails, the planner invokes concern termination. Rule application invokes inference rule application and planning rule application. Inference rule application
invokes concern initiation if a new top-level goal is inferred.

7.4.1

Emotion-Driven

Control

The emotion-driven control procedure is as follows:

1. To get off the ground, invoke inference rule application.
2. Select concern with highest emotional motivation.
3. Invoke planner on that concern.

4. Go to step 2.

In performance mode, only personal goal concerns may be selected, while in
daydreaming mode, both personal goal concerns and daydreaming goal concerns
may be selected. The program switches modes if no concerus are eligible in the
current mode. Optional physical objects are accepted as input upon switching
modes from daydreaming to performance. If input is provided, the switch is not
carried out.
On each cycle of the control loop, the strengths of needs and nonmotivating
emotions are subject to decay. Emotions which decay below a certain threshold
are removed.

7.4.

BASIC PROCEDURES FOR DAYDREAMING

7.4.2

179

Planner

A planning rule specifies how to split a goal into subgoals: The antecedent of
the rule specifies the goal and the consequent specifies the subgoals. There may
be several planning rules whose antecedent matches a given goal. That is, for
any particular goal, there may be more than one way of decomposing that goal
into subgoals. Each such method specifies an alternative continuation of the
current hypothetical world state.
DAYDREAMER keeps track of alternative worlds using GATE contexts—
snapshots of a hypothetical or real world at some moment in time. When several
planning rules apply to a given subgoal, each alternative set of subgoals may be
activated in a separate context. This enables DAYDREAMER to follow one line
of planning, and then, should that line of planning prove unsatisfactory, back up
and attempt an alternative plan already activated in its own isolated context.
This is similar to the notion of nested transactions (Reed, 1978; Moss, 1981;
E. T. Mueller, J. D. Moore, & Popek, 1983) in distributed operating systems
and recovery blocks (Randell, 1975) in programming languages: If one means
for accomplishing a subtask is unsuccessful, any changes already performed are
undone and an alternative method may be invoked.
A planning rule is applied to a given active goal in a given context as follows:
A new context is sprouted from the given context, and the subgoals specified by
the consequent are asserted as new active subgoals in the sprouted context. Thus
each alternative set of subgoals is maintained in a separate context. Subgoals
in each such context are in turn split via planning rules into further subgoals,
sprouting further contexts. In general, a tree of contexts results as shown in
Figure 7.2. Eventually, subgoals are reached whose objectives are already true
(retrieved in the context): a subgoal succeeds in a context when its objective
is retrieved in the context or when all of its subgoals have succeeded. The
objectives of some subgoals are actions; when such a subgoal succeeds, the
action is performed. A concern terminates successfully when its top-level goal
succeeds in a context. If all possibilities are exhausted without success, the
concern terminates unsuccessfully and the top-level goal fails.
The planner conducts a depth-first search (Nilsson, 1980) through the space
of contexts. That is, when several contexts are sprouted from the current context
(corresponding to several alternative planning rule applications), one of those
contexts is selected as the new current context. Contexts are in turn sprouted
from this new current context. One of those contexts is again selected, and this
process continues. If a dead end is reached—because no planning rules are applicable to the remaining subgoals—backtracking is performed. It should be noted
that the creative problem-solving aspect of DAYDREAMER arises, not from the
depth-first search algorithm, but from the analogical planning, mutation, and
serendipity mechanisms which are superimposed upon this basic algorithm.
Specifically, the planner procedure for a given concern is as follows:
1. Invoke rule application in the current context of concern.

CHAPTER

180

7. IMPLEMENTATION OF DAYDREAMER

CX.3

CX.2

AY RULE15

firme

CURRENT
RULE15
RULE62

RULE15
RULE44

Figure 7.2: Tree of Planning Contexts

2. Mark current context as applied.

3. If top-level goal succeeded, invoke concern termination with “success.”
4, Otherwise, if no contexts were sprouted:

(a) (Attempt to backtrack) Until there are unapplied sprouted contexts of
current context or until current context is equal to the root context of
the concern,‘ set current context to the parent of the current context.

(b) (If backtrack unsuccessful, terminate concern) If current context is
root, invoke concern termination with “failure.”

(c) (Else if backtrack successful, set current context) Otherwise, set current context to an unapplied sprouted context of current context.®

5. Otherwise, set current context to one of the sprouted contexts.®
Traces of the execution of the planning algorithm are given in Appendix A.
DAYDREAMER explores hypothetical past, present, and future worlds. However, the program must also have a notion of the “real” world—both past and
present. At any time, one context is designated as the reality context. This
context contains the current state of the world.
4The root context of a concern is the real or imagined world state in which that concern
was first initiated.
5The “best” context is chosen according to various heuristics: For nonanalogical planning,
the plausibility of the planning rule which resulted in the context is used. For analogical
planning, the metrics of episode similarity, desirability, and realism (see Chapter 4) are used.
S Again, the “best” context is chosen according to various heuristics.

7.4.

BASIC PROCEDURES FOR DAYDREAMING

181

Hewitt (1975) has pointed out that using contexts it is difficult to reason
about situations in multiple contexts. He gives the example of two assertions,
Neil Armstrong is standing on the earth and Neil Armstrong is standing on the
moon, which are asserted in different contexts. The assertion, however, that Neil
Armstrong’s weight in the first contert is greater than his weight in the second
context cannot be made in either of these contexts alone. Instead of a context
mechanism, Hewitt proposes the explicit use of situational tags (McCarthy &
Hayes, 1969) within assertions (no longer confined to any particular context). In
DAYDREAMER, references to contexts may be incorporated into facts if desired;
however, since all facts must be asserted into some context, a global context may
have to be created for this purpose.

Even so, as Sacerdoti (1977) points out, it is difficult to represent and use
knowledge about planning in a context scheme. For example, critics (Sacerdoti,

1977) and meta-goals (Wilensky, 1983) are not easily implemented in such a
scheme. Since DAYDREAMER is not concerned with daydreaming or learning
about the planning process itself (although a complete model of daydreaming
would certainly have to account for such metacognitions [Flavell, 1979]), metaplanning strategies are hard-coded in DAYDREAMER.
Contexts are employed in DAYDREAMER for two reasons: to enable backtracking to a previous choice point in daydreaming, and to maintain a trace of
each explored alternative. A stack-based undo mechanism (such as that employed in Prolog [Clocksin & Mellish, 1981]) enables backtracking, but does
not enable retention of alternatives once abandoned. It is important in DAYDREAMER to retain alternative traces because each may be indexed in episodic
memory for possible future use; furthermore, the order of backtracking need not
conform to a stack discipline.
It would not be particularly convenient to implement DAYDREAMER in
Prolog (Clocksin & Mellish, 1981) because of the specialized control structure
which daydreaming requires. The control structure of Prolog—planning rule
application (backward chaining) to achieve a single goal—does not facilitate implementation of multiple active goals, interleaved application of inference rules
(forward chaining), and the storage and later application of planning episodes.

7.4.3.

Concern

Termination

The concern termination procedure given a termination status is as follows:’
1. Destroy otherwise unconnected emotions associated with concern.
2. Create a new positive or negative emotion, whose strength is equal to the
dynamic importance of the top-level goal associated with the concern.®
7Recall that concerns are initiated by inference rules. The procedure for concern initiation
will be presented once we have presented the procedure for inference rule application.
8Response emotions are only created here if the top-level goal is a personal goal or the

REVENGE

daydreaming goal.

CHAPTER

182

7. IMPLEMENTATION OF DAYDREAMER

3. If termination status is “success,” assert objective of top-level goal in the
reality context.

4. If termination status is “failure,”
failed.

change top-level goal from active to

5. Destroy concern.?
Before the emotion-driven control procedure is first invoked, the program
must first be initialized. This consists of:

e initializing various global variables
e creating an initial reality context and loading initial facts into this context
e invoking the inference rule application procedure in the initial reality context, to start up the very first concerns of the program

7.4.4

Rule Application

The rule application procedure in a given context is as follows:

1. For each active subgoal in context whose subgoals have all succeeded or

whose objective is retrieved in the context:!° 14

(a) Change subgoal from active to succeeded.!?
(b) If objective was not retrieved in context, assert objective in context.

(c) (Detect possible fortuitous subgoal success) If the concern of subgoal
is not the current concern, create a surprise emotion and associate it
with the concern of the subgoal.

2. If any objective was asserted in Step 1, invoke inference rule application
in context.
3. If any subgoals succeeded in Step 1, go to Step 1.
® Any planning structure associated with the concern in the reality context is also garbage
collected.

10Tf the subgoal contains variables, (a) a context must be sprouted for each set of bindings
resulting from retrieval, (b) the body of this loop must be performed for each such sprouted
context, and (c) the body of the loop must also instantiate all the subgoals of the current
concern with the bindings, so that any instances of a given variable anywhere in the plan will
take on the value specified in the bindings.
11It is also necessary to handle protection violations: If a succeeded subgoal is no longer
retrieved in the context, it must be replanned.
Script-like plans (for M-DATE, MRESTAURANT, and so on) are not subject to this check.
121f subgoal happens to be an instance of a personal goal, an emotional response must
be generated and associated with the current concern. The rule for emotional responses is
discussed in Chapter 3.

7.4.

BASIC PROCEDURES FOR DAYDREAMING

183

4. Invoke planning rule application in context.

While planning for one concern, a subgoal of another concern will sometimes
succeed. This is the case of a fortuitous subgoal success. In such a situation, a
new surprise emotion is created and added as an additional force of motivation
to the other concern. If, as a result, the other concern has a higher motivation
than the current concern, processing will switch to that other concern on the
next cycle.
The objectives of goals may be states or actions. If the objective of a goal
is an action, a planning rule for that goal specifies preconditions for that action
as subgoals. Once all the subgoals have succeeded, the action is performed by
asserting it as an action into the context in Step 1b above.!%
In performance mode, when the actor of an action goal is another person
and all precondition subgoals of that goal have succeeded, the program stops
and waits for input. The parsed input is compared (through unification) to the
expected action. If the input action is not the same as the action goal objective,
the goal fails (although some other subgoal or concern may still succeed as an
indirect result, through subgoal success detection and serendipity). For example,
in LOVERS1, when DAYDREAMER waits for input which is expected to be
Harrison Ford agreeing to have dinner together, and this input is not received,
this subgoal fails, in turn causing failure of the top-level goal.
In addition, after an action of the daydreamer is performed in performance
mode, the program stops and waits for optional English input of an action or
state in the external world. This input concept is then asserted into the context.
The applicability of the concept to the current top-level goals and subgoals of
the program, if any, is determined through (a) serendipity, to be described, and

(b) detection of fortuitous subgoal success in the above procedure.

7.4.5

Planning Rule Application

The planning rule application procedure in a given context is as follows:
1. For each active subgoal in context whose concern is the current concern
and having no subgoals;'4 for each planning rule whose antecedent unifies
13However, actions may be performed only in performance mode. If an action is about to
be performed and the program is in daydreaming mode, the concern is placed into a watting
state. Only concerns in the runable state are eligible for selection in the emotion-driven control
procedure. When the program switches from daydreaming mode to performance mode, all
waiting concerns are changed to runable concerns. Furthermore, actions with variables in
them may never be performed. If such an action is about to performed, the concern is placed
into a halted state. A halted concern is only made runable when a serendipity or fortuitous
j
subgoal success occurs for that concern.
14S ubgoals of a given goal are expanded in a left-to-right sequence, rather than in all possible
orders. For example, if a given goal has two subgoals, the second subgoal is not selected for

expansion until the first subgoal has succeeded.

CHAPTER

184

7. IMPLEMENTATION OF DAYDREAMER

with the objective of the active subgoal:'° 1°
(a) Sprout a new context from context.
(b) For each subgoal S in the consequent of planning rule, create a new
subgoal of the active subgoal in the sprouted context whose objective is the instantiation of S with the bindings from the above

unification.1”

7.4.6

Inference Rule Application

Unlike planning rules, when the antecedent pattern of an inference rule is retrieved in a context, a fact specified by the consequent pattern is asserted in
the same context. Thus whereas planning rules sprout contexts, inference rules
do not (since inference rules specify inevitable results rather than alternative
possibilities). Inferences rules also have deletion consequents (specified by the
delete slot) which specify facts to be retracted from the context. In English
descriptions of rules, any consequent preceded by “retract” is a deletion consequent.

The inference rule application procedure in a given context (which also may
initiate new concerns), is as follows:

1. For each inference rule R whose antecedents are all retrieved in context;18

for each set of retrieval bindings:19 7°
(a) Instantiate each consequent and deletion consequent of R with the
above bindings.

(b) If the (single) instantiated consequent of R specifies a new top-level
goal T, and (a) T is a daydreaming goal or (b) the current concern is
a personal goal concern, invoke concern initiation on T, R, and the

above bindings.?1
15These two loops are nested.
16Finding planning rules whose antecedent unifies with a subgoal is optimized through use
of the rule connection graph: only planning rules connected to the planning rule from which
the subgoal was derived are considered. The rule connection graph is created when rules are
loaded during program initialization (and updated if new rules are added).
17Instead of specifying subgoals, the consequent may specify code to be executed. It is the
responsibility of this code to create appropriate subgoals. This feature is used in planning for
daydreaming goals such as RATIONALIZATION and REVERSAL.
18This is optimized using the rule connection graph: An inference rule is only considered
if it relates to a “touched” fact in the context (i.e., a fact asserted or modified since the last
application of inference rules).
19These two loops are nested.

20Multiple applications of a given inference rule to the same antecedent facts with the same
set of bindings must be inhibited.

1 Concern initiation is not invoked if an identical top-level goal already exists.

7.4.

BASIC PROCEDURES FOR DAYDREAMING

185

(c) Otherwise, assert each instantiated consequent in the context,2? and
retract each instantiated deletion consequent from the context.?3

2. If an assert or retract was made in Step 1, go to Step 1.74
The action taken in the above procedure when a new top-level goal is activated depends on whether the current concern is a personal goal concern or a
daydreaming goal concern: When the current concern is a personal goal concern, any new top-level goals—both personal and daydreaming goals—result in
the creation of a new concern. When the current concern is a daydreaming goal
concern, only daydreaming goals result in the creation of a new concern. Personal goals activated in a daydreaming goal concern do not create new concerns,
but rather are performed under the existing current concern.
Why should some top-level goals be performed under a separate concern,
and others not? Each concern is intended to correspond to a real top-level
goal of the system. Top-level goals which are activated in daydreaming goal
concerns are not real top-level goals. Rather, they are top-level goals which
would be activated in a particular hypothetical situation. If such top-level goals
should motivate activity, such as planning to avoid an anticipated goal failure,
then a daydreaming goal to fulfill this function, rather than a personal goal,
is activated. Daydreaming goals activated in a daydreaming goal concern do
create new concerns.
Although a personal goal concern modifies the reality context through planning, the only modifications which a daydreaming goal concern can perform to

the reality context are: (a) assertion of new top-level goals, and (b) assertion of

the eventual outcome—success or failure—of the daydreaming goal.”°
Planning for daydreaming goal concerns takes place in imaginary contexts
which are sprouted off of past or current reality contexts. Any imagined changes
to the world state do not affect the reality context but rather are performed in
their own isolated contexts. Personal goal concerns are carried out in the exter-

nal world (e.g., LOVERS1

and FOOD1) and thus repeatedly sprout a context

from the old realityindexcontexts;reality context which becomes the new reality
context. As shown in Figure 7.3, personal goal concerns may be thought of as
221f the instantiated consequent can already be retrieved in the context, (a) the strength of
the retrieved fact is incremented by the strength of the new instantiated consequent, and (b)
no assertion is performed.
231f an instantiated consequent is a personal goal outcome, an emotional response must

be generated and associated with the current concern. The rule for emotional responses is
discussed in Chapter 3.
24Qne may insert at this point a limit on the number of times inferences are applied. There
is no need for this in the current version of DAYDREAMER since the particular set of rules
does not result in infinite inferencing loops. Johnson-Laird (1983, pp. 34-39) discusses how
humans might limit inferencing.
25Daydreaming goal concerns have other side effects, including: (a) modification of emotional state, and (b) storage of generated planning sequences in episodic memory for future
use.

CHAPTER

186

7. IMPLEMENTATION

OF DAYDREAMER

personal goal concerns

LOVERS 1—£-

CIXT! ———» CTXT2 ——_» CIXTS ——»
{

REVERSAL1

CIXT3

—_

reality

CIXTI0

CIXT6 ——»
4

REVENGE1

CIXT7

¢

daydreaming
goal concerns

CIXT4

CIXT8

FOOD1 —g>

CIXT9

Figure 7.3: Personal and Daydreaming Goal Contexts
proceeding horizontally to the right with reality being the rightmost context,
and daydreaming goal concerns (e.g., REVERSAL1 and REVENGE1) may be
thought of as proceeding vertically, sprouting off of present or past reality contexts.

7.4.7

Concern Initiation

The concern initiation procedure for a given top-level goal, inference rule, and
bindings is as follows:

1. Create a new concern.
2. For each emotion F specified by inference rule:
(a) (Daydreaming goal concern activated and motivated by existing emotion.) If E is an existing emotion, associate # with the concern.

(b) (Concern motivated by new emotion.) Otherwise, create a new emotion by instantiating F with bindings and associate the new emotion

with the concern.?°
3. If top-level goal is a personal goal, set the current context of the concern
to the reality context and assert the top-level goal in this context.
4. Otherwise, set the current context of the concern to a new context sprouted
from the reality context and assert the top-level goal in this new sprouted
context.

7.5

Episodic Memory and Analogical Planning

In this section, we revise and augment the above procedures for analogical planning. Figure 7.4 shows the revised procedure dependencies.
261f the top-level goal is a personal goal, the strength of E specifies its intrinsic importance.
If the top-level goal is a daydreaming goal, E specifies an additional motivating emotion.

7.5.

EPISODIC MEMORY AND ANALOGICAL

PLANNING

187

Emotion-driven control

Planner
Rule application

Inference rule application

Concern initiation

Concern termination

Planning rule application

Episode retrieval

Reminding

Episode storage

Subgoal creation
Analogical rule application

Figure 7.4: Revised Procedure Dependencies

7.5.1

Episode Storage

The episode storage procedure given an episode (a planning tree) and an index
(either a concept not containing variables or a planning rule) is as follows:

1. (Intern the index) Set I to the index, if any, in a global list of unique
indices which is equal to, or unifies with, the given index. If there is no
such index, add the given index to the global list of unique indices and set
I to the given index.

2. Create a link from J to episode.
Episode storage is invoked in two situations:
e Top-level goal success: The planning tree for the top-level goal and the
subtrees for each of its descendant subgoals are stored as episodes. Each
goal is indexed under the planning rule which was used to break that goal
down into subgoals. The top-level goal is also stored under additional indices (for persons, physical objects, locations, organizations, and the like)
which are derived automatically from the planning context. The deszrabil-

ity and realism values (see Chapter 4) are also evaluated and stored along
with the episodes.

e Program initialization: Hand-coded episodes are stored. The programmer
may specify various indices in addition to the planning rules corresponding
to each subgoal.

7.5.2

Episode Retrieval

The episode retrieval procedure given a list of indices is as follows:
1. For each index J in indices:

CHAPTER

188

7. IMPLEMENTATION OF DAYDREAMER

(a) (Intern the index) Set I to the index, if any, in the global list of
unique indices which is equal to, or unifies with, J.

(b) If there is such an index, for each episode F linked from J:
i. Increment the number of marks associated with E.
ii. Add E to a list of marked episodes.
iii. If the number of marks associated with £ is equal to the number

of marks required for retrieval of that episode,?’ add E to a list
of retrieved episodes.

2. For each episode FE in the list of marked episodes, reset the number of
marks associated with E to zero.
3. Return the list of retrieved episodes.

7.5.3

Reminding

A global list of recent indices is maintained.

This is a short list (currently of

length at most 6); addition of a new index (when the list is full) causes the
oldest index to be dropped. Whenever new indices are added to the global list
of recent indices, the reminding procedure is invoked for each episode retrieved
using that list. The current overall emotional state (a positive or negative
emotion) is included in the global list of recent indices.
The reminding procedure for a given episode is as follows:

1. If episode is already a member of a global list of recent episodes (currently
of length at most 4), exit this procedure.
2. Add episode to the global list of recent episodes; drop the oldest episode

from the list (if the list is full).
3. Reactivate emotions associated with episode.
4. For each index I of episode, if J is not already contained in the global list
of recent indices, add J to that list and invoke episode retrieval on J and
reminding procedure recursively on each retrieved episode.

5. (Unless this procedure was itself invoked as a result of an object-driven
serendipity), invoke the serendipity recognition procedure for all concerns
and episode.

Step 4 above is what enables the generation of associative streams of remindings:
when an episode is retrieved by one index, its other indices are activated; these
other indices potentially result in the retrieval of other episodes, whose other
indices are in turn activated, retrieving further episodes; and so on.
27T
wo different retrieval thresholds are employed: the number required for retrieval during
analogical planning (generally one index, the rule, is sufficient), and the number required in
other situations (generally set as some percentage of the total number of indices). These
thresholds may be set by the programmer for hand-coded episodes.

7.5.

EPISODIC MEMORY AND ANALOGICAL PLANNING

7.5.4

189

Revised Planning Rule Application

The planning rule application procedure, described above, is revised for analogical planning. This procedure, given a context, is now as follows:

1. For each active subgoal S in context whose concern is the current concern
and having no subgoals:

(a) (Continue with existing analogical plan if still applicable in the target domain) If an analogical episode E is associated with S and the
objective of S unifies with the antecedent of the planning rule R associated with E, invoke the analogical planning procedure on context,
S, E, R, and the bindings from the unification.

(b) Otherwise, for each planning rule R whose antecedent unifies with
the objective of 9:8
i. Set F to the value returned by invoking the episode retrieval
procedure on a list containing R.
ii. (If analogical episodes retrieved, begin new analogical plans) If F
is not empty, for each episode F in F’,, (a) invoke the reminding
procedure on E, (b) invoke the analogical rule application procedure on context, S, E, R, and the bindings from the unification.

iii. (Else, perform regular planning) Otherwise, invoke the subgoal
creation procedure for context, S, NIL, R, and the bindings from
the unification.

7.5.5

Analogical Rule Application

The analogical rule application procedure for a given context, subgoal, episode,
planning rule, and bindings is as follows:

1. (Use episode to instantiate unbound variables in current plan) Augment
bindings with bindings resulting from the unification of (a) the antecedent
and consequents of planning rule with (b) the concrete goal and subgoals

of episode.?9
2. Invoke the subgoal creation procedure on context, subgoal, episode, planning rule, and bindings.

7.5.6

Subgoal Creation

The subgoal creation procedure for a given context, subgoal, episode, planning
rule, and bindings is as follows:
28 Episodic planning rules are not eligible here. They may only be applied when they are
contained within analogical episodes (for example, as a result of serendipity).
29Whenever a variable in the given subgoal is provided with a value, instances of that
variable in other subgoals of the current plan must take on the same value.

CHAPTER

190

7. IMPLEMENTATION

OF DAYDREAMER

1. Set C to a new context sprouted from context.

2. (Break subgoal into further subgoals) For each subgoal S in the consequent
of planning rule:
(a) Create a new subgoal of subgoal in C whose objective is the instantiation of S with bindings.

(b) (Carry along episode for analogical planning of subgoal) Associate
the appropriate subepisode (if any) of episode (if not NIL) with the
new subgoal.

7.6

Other Planning

This section describes the modifications to the above procedures necessary to
implement forward other planning and backward other planning.

7.6.1

Forward Other Planning

Mental states or beliefs of the daydreamer and of others coexist in each context.
Every fact in a given context is assumed to be a belief of the daydreamer. Some
of these beliefs are beliefs about the beliefs of others. While a belief of the
daydreamer that it is raining in a certain location is represented as:
(RAINING

obj Location1)

the belief that Other believes that it is raining in that location is represented
as:
(BELIEVE

actor Other
obj (RAINING

obj Location1))

“Objective” beliefs of others cannot be represented in this scheme. All facts
are assumed to be beliefs of the daydreamer; thus one may only represent beliefs of the daydreamer about the beliefs of others. A belief of a belief of the
daydreamer (who is represented as the slot-filler object Me), such as:
(BELIEVE

actor Me
obj (RAINING

obj Location1))

is not currently permitted.
Such a structure would be required to model
metacognition (Flavell, 1979), which is beyond the scope of the present work.
The planning procedures described in the previous sections are modified
to make use of a list called the belief path. This list determines the planning
viewpoint. Normally, the belief path is set to (Me). However, in order to
simulate the behavior of Harrison, the belief path would be set to (Harrison
Me). This path means “Harrison as seen through my eyes.” In order to simulate

7.7.

SERENDIPITY

191

the simulation of the behavior of another person Debra by Harrison, the belief
path is set to (Debra Harrison Me). This path means “Debra as seen through
Harrison’s eyes as seen through my eyes.” The last element of a belief path

must always be (Me).

DAYDREAMER rules are expressed relative to the person who is planning,
specified by the ?Self variable. When the daydreamer is planning, ?Self is bound
to Me. If planning for another person is being performed, ?Self is bound to that
person. In general, ?Self is bound to the first element of the belief path.
All assertions, retractions, and retrievals in the planning procedures are
performed relative to the current belief path. For example, if the belief path is
(Harrison Me), then before performing an assertion, retraction, or retrieval on
a given fact, it is enclosed in the following way:
(BELIEVE

actor Harrison

obj Fact)

If the belief path is (Debra Harrison Me), then the fact is enclosed as follows:
(BELIEVE

actor Harrison
obj (BELIEVE

actor Debra

obj Fact))

The rule application procedure is revised to:

(a) perform rule application

with a belief path of (Me), and (b) perform rule application with a belief path of
(Other Me) for each other person of current interest, indicated by the presence
of an assertion of the form:
(OTHER

actor Other)

in the current planning context. (This assertion is added, for example, when
DAYDREAMER is in a LOVERS relationship with another person.)

7.6.2

Backward

Other Planning

Instead of finding a rule whose antecedent goal unifies with:
(BELIEVE

actor Other
obj ?Mental-state)

one is found whose antecedent goal unifies with ?Mental-State. In this unification, ?Self is bound to Other rather than to Me. Then the subgoals are
instantiated and enclosed in a BELIEVE before being asserted:
(BELIEVE

actor Other
obj ?Subgoal)

CHAPTER

192

7. IMPLEMENTATION OF DAYDREAMER

Emotion-driven control

Planner

Rule application

Inference rule application

Concern initiation

Concern termination

Planning rule application

Sad Nin Ene nt

Episode retrieval

(Input) —————

Serendipity recognition

Episode storage

Reminding

<@—

Subgoal creation

_— Analogical rule application

Mutation

Figure 7.5: Further Revised Procedure Dependencies

7.7

Serendipity

In this section, we further augment the above procedures for serendipity.
ure 7.5 shows the revised procedure dependencies.

7.7.1

Fig-

Serendipity Recognition

The serendipity recognition procedure given a concern and a concept or episode
is as follows:
1. Find a top rule T whose antecedent unifies with an appropriate goal G of

the concern.°*°
2. If given an episode, find an episodic rule, the bottom rule B, contained in
the episode; otherwise, find a rule B having a consequent subgoal which
unifies with the given concept.

3. Perform an intersection search from T to B in rule connection graph.*! 3?
3°If the concern is a personal goal, the personal goal is used. If the concern is a learning daydreaming goal, the associated personal goal is used. If the concern is an emotional
daydreaming goal, the daydreaming goal is used.
31 This search finds up to a certain number of paths (currently 3), including those with cycles,
up to some maximum length (currently 8). A recursive procedure is employed which works

its way down from T and up from B simultaneously; whenever an intersection is detected, the
two partial paths are appended together and added to a list of found paths. To reduce search
somewhat, a given rule may occur at most twice in a path.

32 Only (a) nonepisodic planning rules, or (b) episodic planning rules contained in the given
episode or the global list of recent episodes, are eligible in the search.

7.7.

SERENDIPITY

193

4, If a path is found:

(a) Verify the path by (1) unifying the objective of G with the antecedent of the first rule of the path, and then (2) propagating bindings through progressive unification from the beginning to the end
of ae sees while simultaneously constructing an episode (planning

tree).
(b) If verification succeeds:
i. If concern is a daydreaming goal concern, set C' to a new context
sprouted from the context in which G was first activated, and
set the current context of concern to C.
ii. Otherwise,

set C' to a new

context

sprouted from the reality

context (which becomes the new reality context).*4
iii. Add the constructed episode as a new analogical plan for G in

C.
iv. Generate a surprise emotion and associate it with the concern.

The serendipity recognition procedure is invoked in several situations:

Input-state-driven serendipity: When a (state or action) concept is received as input, the serendipity recognition procedure is invoked for all
concerns and the given concept.
Object-driven serendipity: When a physical object is received as input, the
serendipity recognition procedure is invoked for all concerns, and for all

episodes retrieved using the indices*® of: (a) the given physical object, and
(b) indices in the global list of recent indices. The reminding procedure is
invoked for any retrieved episode which results in a serendipity.
Concern-activation-driven serendipity: When a new concern is activated,
the serendipity recognition procedure is invoked on that concern for all
episodes in the global list of recent episodes.
Episode-driven serendipity. When the reminding procedure is invoked for
an episode (unless that procedure has already been invoked from objectdriven serendipity), the serendipity recognition procedure is invoked for
all concerns and that episode.

Mutation-driven serendipity: When an mutated action is generated, the
serendipity recognition procedure is invoked on the current concern and
33This procedure is discussed in greater detail and an example is given in Chapter 5.
34 Any existing planning structure for G in C is also garbage-collected here.
35In this case, an episode is retrieved whenever the number of marks is one less than the
number normally required: the serendipity, if any, serves to provide the remaining “index.”

194

CHAPTER

7. IMPLEMENTATION

OF DAYDREAMER

the mutated action.*© If a serendipity occurs, then the mutation is deemed
successful.

7.7.2

Action Mutation

The action mutation procedure for a given concern is as follows:
1. For each of the descendant leaf contexts C of the root context of concern; for each active goal in C' whose objective A is an action; for each
mutation?” M of A:°8

(a) Invoke serendipity recognition on concern and M.
Action mutation is currently invoked in DAYDREAMER
achieving a given daydreaming goal have failed.

when

all plans for

3°In this case, the top rule for the intersection search is derived from the parent goal of the

action subgoal being mutated.
37The strategies for mutating an action are described in Chapter 5.
38 These three loops are nested.

Chapter 8

Comparison of Episodic
Memory Schemes
In the human stream of thought, thinking about one past experience or episode
naturally leads one to think about another. In DAYDREAMER, associated with
each episode is a collection of indices. An episode is retrieved when a sufficient
number of its indices are currently active. Whenever an episode is retrieved,
its remaining indices are made active. Therefore, retrieval of one episode may
activate new indices which result in the retrieval of a second episode, which in
turn may activate new indices resulting in the retrieval of a third episode, and so
on, producing a stream of recalled episodes. Retrieval of a given episode may in
fact require indices resulting from more than one previously retrieved episode.
How are episodes stored?
Given a collection of active indices, how are
episodes which are stored under those indices retrieved? In this chapter, we
examine three approaches which have been proposed in the past: discrimination nets, spreading activation, and connectionist nets. We then propose an
alternative mechanism called intersection indexing.

8.1

Discrimination

Nets

A discrimination net (Feigenbaum, 1963; Charniak, Riesbeck, & McDermott,
1980) is a tree structure whose branching nodes correspond to decisions, and
whose leaves correspond to the final results of a series of such decisions. Discrimination nets were first used in the EPAM program (Feigenbaum, 1963; Feigenbaum & Simon, 1984) which models human learning of nonsense syllables, and
have since been employed in a number of other artificial intelligence programs
(Goldman, 1975; Kolodner, 1984).
Discrimination nets may be used as a mechanism for episode retrieval in the
following manner: Each branching node consists of the possible values of a given
195

196

CHAPTER 8.

COMPARISON OF EPISODIC MEMORY SCHEMES

emot = neg

emot = pos

obj = lamp
obj = chair

ep1

obj = lamp
obj = chair

ep2

ep3

ep4

Figure 8.1: Discrimination Net

index, and each leaf designates a particular episode. As an example—which we
will use to compare alternative indexing mechanisms—suppose that episodes are
indexed under emotions and objects, and that each index takes on two values:
negative and positive, chair and lamp, respectively. Further suppose that there
are four episodes, each indexed under one of the four possible combinations of
indices and index values. A discrimination net which organizes these episodes
for retrieval is shown in Figure 8.1. If one wishes to retrieve an episode given
the indices and index values of positive emotion and chair, one starts at the
root of the tree, then traverses the positive emotion branch, traverses the chair
branch, and finally arrives at the node for eps.
Such a discrimination net, however, does not facilitate retrieval when indices
are presented in the wrong order (if, say, chair is presented before neg), when
one or more indices are unavailable (if, say, only the index of neg is given), or
both (if, say, only the index of chair is given). In such cases, traversal of the
net cannot proceed beyond a certain point because an index is not available, or
because the next available index does not appear on any of the branches at the
current point. Humans, on the other hand, are able to retrieve episodes given
partial sets of indices presented in various orders.

One solution to this problem is to employ a redundant discrimination net in
which episodes are stored under several different index orders. A fully redundant
discrimination net—an example of which is shown in Figure 8.2—enables a set
of indices to be supplied in any possible order. If a partial set of indices is
supplied, the traversal process will terminate at a nonleaf node. At this point,
it is possible simply to retrieve all of the leaf episodes below this node.
However, protocols (Kolodner, 1984; Reiser, 1983) and other evidence (M. D.
Williams & Hollan, 1981) suggest that humans must still generate the remaining indices before recall of an episode can occur. Kolodner gives the following
example of this process of elaboration: Suppose former Secretary of State Cyrus
Vance is asked to recall any diplomatic meetings about the Camp David accords
with Menachim Begin. Further suppose there are several such episodes in his
memory indexed under different places—Israel, Belgium, and the United States.

8.1.

DISCRIMINATION NETS

197

emot=neg
obj=chair |\ obj=lamp

obj=chair

ep1

obj=lamp

ep2

emot=neg

ep3

ep4

epi

ep3

ep2

ep4

Figure 8.2: Fully Redundant Discrimination Net

At first, without a place index no episodes might be recalled. However, he may
infer the place in which an event might have taken place from the nationalities
or countries of residence of the participants. In this case, Israel and the United
States may be inferred as places, enabling the remaining branches to be traversed and the episodes recalled. (But note that the episode which took place
in Belgium will not be recalled unless suitable indices for that episode are somehow generated.) Kolodner provides a collection of general and domain-specific
strategies for elaboration in memory retrieval. These strategies are implemented
in the CYRUS computer program which stores events in the life of former Secretaries of State Cyrus Vance and Edmund Muskie, and answers English questions
about those events.
Kolodner employs a redundant discrimination net in which each node is
called an E-MOP and viewed as a generalization of all the leaf episodes below
that node. Thus each E-MOP indexes individual episodes (leaf nodes connected

directly to the E-MOP) and other more specific E-MOPs (connected nonleaf
nodes). These episodes and E-MOPs are indexed by their differences from
each other (in terms of different possible indices and values). For example, in
Figure 8.2, the E-MOP reached by traversing the emot = neg link from the root
generalizes those episodes involving negative emotions—ep; and ep2—which are
distinguished from each other by whether they involve a chair or a lamp. In
CYRUS, E-MOPs are more than nodes: They are actually structures which

contain information useful in elaboration (such as default index values, causal
relationships between E-MOPs, and other inferences). In addition, E-MOPs
provide generalizations useful for disambiguation and filling in details in text

understanding (Lebowitz, 1980).
While the number of nodes in a nonredundant discrimination net grows
linearly with the number of stored episodes,’ a fully redundant discrimination
1Specifically, a nonredundant discrimination net requires (eb — 1)/(b— 1) nodes, where e is
the number of episodes and 6 is the number of branches from each node (assumed to be the
same for each node).

198

CHAPTER 8. COMPARISON OF EPISODIC MEMORY SCHEMES

emot=neg

emot=pos

ep2

obj=chair

epi

obj=lamp

ep2

emot=pos

emot=neg

ep1

ep3

Figure 8.3: Redundant Discrimination Net with Delayed Expansion

net exhibits combinatorial growth. Kolodner copes with this potential problem
in two ways: First, strategies are used to constrain the possible indices for
indexing episodes and E-MOPs under a given E-MOP—the net is thus only
partially redundant. Second, E-MOPs are created only when a new episode is
to be added into the net at a point where an episode is already present. When
a new E-MOP is created in this way, the two episodes are then indexed by their
differences. Thus expansion of the net is delayed. For example, Figure 8.3 shows
what the net looks like in this scheme before ep, has been added.
Because of the unrealistic space requirements of redundant discrimination
nets and further because we are not concerned with elaboration processes in
the current work, such nets are not employed in DAYDREAMER for episode
indexing and retrieval.

8.2

Spreading Activation Models

In general, spreading activation models of cognition (Quillian, 1968; Collins
& Loftus, 1975; J. R. Anderson, 1983) consist of a processor and a long-term
memory composed of a collection of nodes, each of which is connected to other
nodes by bidirectional links.? Associated with each node is an analog level of
activation, which may be viewed as modeling human short-term memory. The
processor may access any node whose activation is above a certain threshold;
such nodes are therefore said to be a part of working memory. The more active
the node, the faster that node may be accessed (or the higher priority that
node has to be processed). The activation of a node may thus be regarded as a
heuristic for the relevance of that node to current processing (J. R. Anderson,

1983). A node is said to be retrieved from long-term memory when it is brought
?The various spreading activation models differ in certain details from the one presented
here, which is a combination of the model of J. R. Anderson (1983) and that of Langley and
Neches (1981).

8.2.

SPREADING ACTIVATION MODELS

199

into working memory—when its activation rises above a certain level.
Activation of a node is continually spread to linked nodes via the process
of spreading activation. That is, every node with a nonzero activation continuously leaks some of its activation to connected nodes. The purpose of spreading
activation is to increase the activation of nodes related to those currently active;
presumably, if active nodes are relevant to processing, so are those nodes associated with active nodes. The activation spread from a node to a linked node
is proportional to the numeric trace strength of the linked node relative to the
sum of the trace strengths of all the linked nodes. In other words, activation
spread to connected nodes is divided up among those nodes in proportion to
their relative strengths. As a result, the more links a node has to other nodes,
the less activation each of those linked nodes will receive from the node. This
is called the fan effect (J. R. Anderson, 1983).
Since activation is continually spread from one node to another, decay must
be built into the mechanism in order to prevent the activation levels of nodes
from forever rising. Decay will cause a node to leave working memory after
a certain length of time (unless the activation of the node is replenished)—
thus decay models the time-limited aspect of short-term memory. Continuous
spreading of activation eventually leads to an even distribution of activation
throughout the network; with the addition of decay, that activation tends toward zero. However, certain nodes, called source nodes, enable the introduction
of new activation into the network. Source nodes may be created and added
into working memory by the processor or through perception of the external
environment.
Miller (1956) found that the “channel capacity” of short-term memory is
limited to seven—plus or minus two—meaningful chunks (Simon, 1974) of information. This limited capacity is modeled in spreading activation models by
imposing a limit on the total amount of activation permitted in the system;
this imposes a (variable) limit on the number of nodes which can be in working
memory at any given time.
How does working memory relate to subjective experience and consciousness? J. R. Anderson (1983) avoids any mention of consciousness, except in a
note where he writes: “I do not intend to correlate active memory with what

one is currently conscious of” (p. 309). Ericsson and Simon (1984, pp. 221-223)
assume that thoughts which may be verbalized (after suitable recoding) correspond to the contents of working memory. They thus imply that (objective)
data structures in working memory are identical with the subject’s (subjective)
focus of attention. However, they identify neither attention nor working memory
with consciousness, since, as James (1890a, p. 285) has pointed out, attention
picks out only some of the sensations which are a part of consciousness. Ericsson

and Simon (1984, p. 222) admit that they do not choose to identify working
memory with consciousness because their concern is with information relevant
in task-oriented situations. However, as argued in Chapter 10, the entire gamut
of conscious thoughts (including, for example, feelings) is subject to verbaliza-

200

CHAPTER 8. COMPARISON OF EPISODIC MEMORY SCHEMES

tion. Although Ericsson and Simon (1984) claim that “day-dreams and similar
thoughts contain imagery that never is heeded directly” (p. 223), people are in
fact able to describe such imagery to others (Varendonck, 1921; Klinger, 1971;
Pope, 1978). Therefore, we can only ask the question: If these other compo- .
nents of consciousness are not a part of working memory, what are they a part
of?
Spreading activation and network models of memory have been used by several researchers (Clark & Isen, 1982; Bower & Cohen, 1982) to explain emotiondependent memory recall effects: Emotional states are linked in memory to the
experiences involving those states. When one is in a certain emotional state,
spreading activation primes experiences connected to that emotional state, making it more likely for those experiences to be recalled.
The basic architecture for connectionist models (Rumelhart, McClelland,
& PDP Research Group, 1986; Waltz & Pollack, 1985) is similar to that for
spreading activation as described here, with the addition of inhibitory links for
spreading negative activation to connected nodes. Thus a node with a high activation level tends to reduce, rather than increase, the activation level of nodes
connected by inhibitory links. An inhibitory link from one node to another indicates that the activation of one node is evidence that the other node should not
be activated. Such links force the system to select one of the two nodes, but not

both. Rumelhart, Hinton, and McClelland (1986) present a generalized model
for parallel distributed processing which includes many spreading activation and
connectionist models as special cases.
Continual flow of activation between connected nodes is computationally
expensive in a serial system: The activation for every node in the network must

be calculated based on the activation of each of its neighboring nodes on every
clock tick. Because of this problem, spreading activation programming tools
such as the PRISM language (Langley & Neches, 1981) require the programmer
to invoke spreading activation explicitly and to specify the starting nodes for the
process. In PRISM, activation does not spread back along paths from which it
originated and spreading terminates when a node is reached which has already
had activation spread to it from another path (however, although spreading
does not continue beyond such a node, the activation from multiple paths is in
fact summed at such intersection nodes). If the “spreading to a depth” strategy
is selected, the process also terminates when a certain depth is reached. If
the “spreading to a limit” strategy is selected, spreading terminates when the
activation level decays below a certain threshold.
How may spreading activation be employed in retrieving episodes from memory? Figure 8.4 shows a network (loosely based on an example of J. R. Anderson,
1983, pp. 91-92) representing four actions (which are more specific versions of
the example episodes we are using to compare various indexing mechanisms):
failing at sitting down in a chair, failing to purchase a lamp, successfully purchasing a chair, and successfully turning on a lamp. For simplicity in this
example, we assume that an episode consists of a single action performed on

8.2.

SPREADING ACTIVATION MODELS

chair (1.0)

<-chairs (.1)

201

act3 (.045
— success3
)
(.020) ——pos3

chair1 (.1)———act1 (.126)

|
sit (.020)

(.018)

purchase (.057)

fail1 (.11)

neg (1.0) Kare (.1) —— fail2 (.09)

(.016)

pos4 (.002)

‘y

neg1 (.1) ——

——pos

success4 (.003)

act2 (.083)

turn-on (.001)

act4 (.004)

lamp2 (.036)

lamp (.033)

lamp4 (.003)

neg5 (.1)

Working

= Long-term

Memory

=: Memory

Figure 8.4: Network for Spreading Activation

behalf of a goal. In order to retrieve, say, episodes involving negative emotions
and chairs, the nodes neg and chair are first activated, and then spreading activation is performed starting from those nodes. After this process completes,’
action, ends up with an activation of 0.126, actiong with 0.0830, actzong with
0.0450, and action, with 0.00428. A relatively high activation level is attained
by action, since activation is spread to it from two different paths. That is,
action, is a node at which the paths emanating from neg and chair intersect.
The node we desire to retrieve is in fact action; since it is an episode involving negative emotions and chairs. However, another such intersection node is
actiong, because this node involves negative emotions and purchasing, which in
turn involves chairs via action3. Thus spreading activation may find episodes
that are only indirectly related to the given retrieval indices. The threshold for
adding items into working memory is set depending on how close of a match is
desired for retrieval:

if the threshold is set to 0.1, action, is added to working

memory; if the threshold is 0.08, both action; and action2 are added.
Thus spreading activation provides a promising mechanism for retrieval: For
example, if it is desired to retrieve episodes similar to an episode which is currently active, one may simply spread activation from the current episode to
3The sample values shown in Figure 8.4 were calculated according to the “spreading to

a limit” strategy of PRISM (Langley & Neches, 1981) with all trace strengths equal to 1.0,
spread decay equal to 0.9, and nodes other than neg and chair having an initial activation of

0.0. It was further assumed that relation or class nodes (such as neg, chair, purchase, and

so on) were connected to a total of 10 nodes (not shown).

202

CHAPTER 8.

COMPARISON OF EPISODIC MEMORY SCHEMES

related nodes. This works without regard to how these episodes are represented
since a link between two nodes implies some relationship between those nodes
in any representation scheme. The more relationships the current episode has
in common with another episode, the more activation that other episode will
receive. In effect, spreading activation is able to discover its own indices—it
would appear that higher-level patterns can emerge out of the relationships already present in the network. In addition, the fan effect automatically assigns
higher priority to more unique indices, since nodes which are less unique have
more links to other nodes and thus are less likely to contribute to retrieval.
Unfortunately, there are several problems with spreading activation: The
first problem is that the activation levels of nodes along the path to a desired
episode—and even those not along such a path—are often higher than the activation of the episode itself. In fact, unless intersection effects are significant,
they must be higher. As a result, all of these nodes are retrieved in addition
to the desired episode nodes. These extraneous nodes are difficult for most
programs to handle. For example, suppose we would like to retrieve action2;
we therefore set the working memory activation threshold to 0.08. In this case,
not only are action, and actiong added to working memory, but so are negs,
chairs, chair,, negi, fail,, neg, and fail. Many of these nodes are irrelevant;
we only wanted to know about actions directly or indirectly involving negative
emotions and chairs. One possible solution (although it is somewhat against
the spirit of spreading activation) is to limit retrieval to certain classes of nodes,
such as actions.
A second problem is that as more nodes and links are added to the network,
or as desired episodes becomes more distant from their indices, the activation
level of a desired episode becomes lower and lower. This is because the fan effect
divides the leaked activation of each node among all its connected nodes. The
result is that the activation levels of retrieval indices are very large in comparison
with the activation levels of retrieved episodes. A possible solution (which again
seems against the spirit of the mechanism) is to bring the activation level of an
episode up to a certain high level once it is retrieved.
A third problem is that the difference in activation level—in a particular
situation—between a desired episode and an undesired episode may be very
slight. To an extent this effect occurs in our example: although action; is much
more related to negative emotions and chairs than is actiong, their activation
levels differ by a relatively small amount. Even so, after carefully setting the
working memory threshold in order to retrieve the desired episode in one situation, the programmer may discover that this threshold does not retrieve desired
episodes in other situations: the activation levels of episodes are in a completely
different range.
Finally, spreading activation mechanisms often present a temptation to try
to tune the system manually by modifying trace strengths or the network itself
to get a more intuitive result: Why, for example, does action end up with

a higher level of activation than action3?

After all, actions is closer to chair

8.3.

CONNECTIONISM

203

than action is to neg. It is not because actions is involved in an intersection.
Rather, it is because of the somewhat irrelevant fact that chairl is involved

in two actions (and thus its activation is divided in two) while neg only results from fatlg which is only associated with actionz (and thus in this case
the activation is largely preserved). At this point, one may attempt to tune the
network. However, this often degenerates into a never-ending process of tuning
and retuning. Something is wrong if the proper operation of an artificial intelligence program depends on a very fine tuning of numbers by the programmer.
Of course, if the system is able to tune itself, that is another matter entirely.
Learning in connectionist models is in fact accomplished via automatic tuning
of connection strengths (McClelland, Rumelhart, & Hinton, 1986). We consider
these models in the next section.
The rule intersection search employed for serendipity detection in DAYDREAMER does not suffer from the same problems as general spreading activation, since activation spreads only through rule interconnections, rather than
through every concept link or relationship. Rule intersection is therefore a more
“content-based” scheme (Reiser, 1983) for spreading activation.
A redundant discrimination net trades space for fast retrieval time, while
spreading activation trades time for a compact memory representation: Spreading activation is expensive in terms of processing time because the activation
level of every node connected to retrieval indices up to a certain depth must be
calculated. In contrast, with redundant discrimination nets it is merely necessary to perform a linear traversal of a number of levels of the tree corresponding
to the number of indices (nonetheless, Kolodner’s [1984] retrieval algorithm exhibits a combinatorial increase with the number of indices because it considers
all possible paths “in parallel” until an episode is retrieved). Because of the
problems with general spreading activation discussed above, this mechanism is
not employed in DAYDREAMER for episode retrieval.

8.3.

Connectionism

McClelland and Rumelhart (1986) present a connectionist model of memory
storage and retrieval. The essential features of this model are as follows: Given
a collection of episodes encoded in terms of a set of microfeatures, the mechanism automatically finds salient features of those episodes. That is, it classifies
the episodes into one or more schemata—central tendencies of similar sets of
episodes. Although single episodes cannot be retrieved from the network, similar episodes which have been repeated several times can be retrieved. Thus
episodes and schemata are not distinguished in the network—all episodes are
effectively stored as schemata.
Schemata are represented as a stable pattern of activation in the network.
Learning of schemata is accomplished in an incremental fashion through alteration of the strengths of links when presented with a new episode. Retrieval is

204

CHAPTER 8. COMPARISON OF EPISODIC MEMORY SCHEMES

viewed as reinstating the activation pattern of a prior schema given part of that
schema.

A subset of the nodes of the network (those that are not hidden) are used for

the input and output of schema microfeatures. These external nodes are used to
provide indices for retrieval (input) and to provide information retrieved about
a schema (output). In order to perform a retrieval, appropriate index nodes
are activated—any of the external nodes may be used. Retrieval then consists
of reading the activation levels of the remaining external nodes. Thus retrieval
consists of filling in the remaining portion of a schema given a part of that
schema.
How might we use such a mechanism in DAYDREAMER? One task is for
one or more active or recent episodes to produce a reminding of another episode
which is related to those episodes. Since a connectionist network can only represent one episode at a time (McClelland & Rumelhart, 1986, p. 176), there must
be multiple copies of the same network; the number of copies will be determined
by the maximum number of episodes we wish to allow to be active at the same
time. The external nodes of each of these networks are then connected together
in order to enable episodes active in source networks to produce a reminding
of an episode having similar external microfeatures in a target network. The
connections must be unidirectional—that is, the external nodes of the source
networks must charge the external nodes of the target network without the external nodes of the target network affecting the external nodes of the source
networks. Without unidirectional connection of external nodes, all networks
would settle into the same episode. Furthermore, this directionality will have to
change depending on which networks are currently source networks and which
is the target.
Each network will contain a collection of hidden nodes for representing
episodes in a distributed fashion, and a set of external nodes for input and output. The external nodes will employ a local representation of the microfeatures
of interest external to the module.* In particular, we will use the microfeatures
of the example we have been using to compare various retrieval mechanisms.
As shown in Figure 8.5, there will be one external node for each of the retrieval
indices (negative emotion, positive emotion, chair, and lamp) and nodes for the
information which we desire to retrieve, namely, the action performed in the
episode. We then incorporate the relevant episodes into the network through
use of a learning algorithm (see, for example, McClelland & Rumelhart, 1986,
pp. 179-181). At this point, the connection strengths among the hidden nodes
4Local representations of external microfeatures—already determined to be significant by
the programmer—are used in most of the example connectionist networks discussed by Rumelhart et al. (1986). One example (Rumelhart, Smolensky, McClelland, & Hinton, 1986, pp22-38) uses objects in a room as external microfeatures, another (Smolensky, 1986a, pp. 240250) uses the resistance, voltage, and current in parts of an electronic circuit. In fact, these
examples even involve local representations of the network itself, constructed manually by the
programmer. An exception is provided by the learning mechanism of Rumelhart and Zipser
(1986), which discovers salient features starting from an arbitrary initial set of microfeatures.

8.3.

CONNECTIONISM

205

neg

indices

os
P ;

chair

lamp

retrieved
information

purchase
sit

Figure 8.5: Connectionist Net for Episodes: First Attempt

encode the relevant episodes in a distributed fashion. If we now active various
indices, the network will respond with the prototypical actions for those indices.
Furthermore, we can activate actions and see what indices respond, or any other
combination.
However, there are several problems with the above: First, for actions we
need to be able to represent the type of action (such as purchase and sit),
and the slots—sometimes called roles and cases (such as the agent, object,
destination, instrument, and so on)—of the action. How do we represent actions
in terms of the activation levels of external nodes? How, in particular, do we
implement slots? For example, if an object is active, how do we know which
slot it fills of the active action? Slots may be implemented by using clusters
of mutually inhibitory nodes (Rumelhart, Smolensky, McClelland, & Hinton,
1986, pp. 33-34). (This assumes whoever is reading the external nodes is able
to interpret this output network properly.) Thus we might use a network such
as that shown in Figure 8.6. The drawback of this, however, is that each entity
(such as person1) must be replicated for each possible slot which that entity can
fill. If there is only one action per episode, this may not be so bad. However,
if there are several actions in each episode, then each action type and slot must
. be repeated for each of the actions in the episode, as shown in Figure 8.7. All
of these nodes, of course, have to be allocated in advance.
Second, observe what is happening here: Instead of the representation
emerging automatically within the network itself, the representation is being
constructed manually by the programmer at the external nodes of the network,
as shown in Figure 8.8. A major claim of connectionist models is that they can
be used to find a set of salient features in input patterns already encoded in
terms of some set of microfeatures (McClelland, Rumelhart, & Hinton, 1986;
Rumelhart & Zipser, 1986). Unfortunately, it is difficult to find an appropriate
set of microfeatures when the system has to deal with complex concepts such
as emotions, goals, actions, beliefs, persons, objects, and causal relationships.
For example, what set of microfeatures should be used to represent actions?
How, for example, will the system distinguish between a sequence of two sim-

206

CHAPTER 8.

COMPARISON OF EPISODIC MEMORY SCHEMES

destination

PERSON2

Figure 8.6: Connectionist Net for Episodes: Second Attempt

ilar actions performed in one episode, and two similar actions which occur in
different episodes? In the first case, one would like to retain two actions. In the
second case, one would like to form a generalization. The connectionist model
of memory presented by McClelland and Rumelhart (1986) would generalize in
both cases. In order to avoid difficulties such as this, the connectionist designer
is forced to examine such questions as: What is an episode? How are episodes
represented? Should an episode be represented as a sequence of actions? Should
the sequence of actions be ordered? Do episodes involve causal relations among
those actions? What kinds of causal relations are there? These are exactly the
kinds of problems which knowledge structures such as scripts, plans, and goals

(Schank & Abelson, 1977) are intended to address.
Although connectionist models do not enable one to bypass the difficult
problems of representation, they do provide a degree of automatic generalization once appropriate representations have been found. Nonetheless, it is important to recognize the limitations of this generalization mechanism: First, unlike
mechanisms for explanation-based generalization (DeJong, 1981), connectionist
learning procedures cannot distinguish relevant features from irrelevant features
in a small number of trials. Consider a story about kidnapping which describes
the kidnap victim as a woman whose hair is dark brown and whose father is
rich. A connectionist model will treat each of these features equally. A human,
on the other hand, knows that certain features are more relevant to the goals of

8.3.

CONNECTIONISM

207

various

indices

action1

agent!

action2
ATRANS

@

agent2

Figure 8.7: Connectionist Net for Episodes: Third Attempt

SCRIPTS, PLANS, GOALS, etc.

Figure 8.8: Connectionist Net for Episodes: Fourth Attempt

208

CHAPTER 8. COMPARISON OF EPISODIC MEMORY SCHEMES

the kidnapper and hence are more useful as components of a generalization.
Second, since generalizations are emergent properties of the network rather
than representational structures, connectionist mechanisms have difficulty in
using those generalizations as a basis for the representation of further concepts
(McClelland & Rumelhart, 1986, pp. 209-214). For example, one task in DAYDREAMER is as follows: When the system is reminded of an episode which is
related to the current daydream, components of that episode may be incorporated into the daydream. A connectionist scheme has one method of combining
episodes—this method might be described as interpolation. Daydreaming requires more interesting ways of composing episodes: For example, employing
an episode as a subepisode of the current daydream, employing only parts of
the episode in the current daydream, modifying parts of the episode before
employing them in the current daydream, and so on.® Viewing episodes and
schemata as emergent properties of a network is an intriguing idea, but—in its
current formulation—of little use in the generation of complex behaviors such
as daydreaming.
At the very least, connectionist models provide a mechanism for episode
retrieval similar to that provided by spreading activation. How do connectionist models differ from spreading activation models? Distributed connectionist
models create new concepts by tuning the weights of the links in the network
to create a new stable pattern of activation. However, only one concept can be
represented at a time in such a scheme. This presents a serious difficulty since
it is often necessary to relate two concepts and it is often necessary to have
multiple instances of a given concept. One solution is to use a separate network
for each concept instance (Hinton, McClelland, & Rumelhart, 1986; Hinton,

1981). McClelland (1986) presents a mechanism called connection information
distribution which replicates modular networks on a demand basis. In local
spreading activation schemes, a new concept is created simply by adding a node
to the network and connecting it via appropriate links to the nodes to which
it is related.

A local connectionist scheme which allows creation of new nodes,

however, is quite similar to spreading activation networks.

8.4

Intersection Indexing

Instead of employing a general spreading activation mechanism for indexing, we
propose the use of what we call intersection indexing. This scheme employs a
network consisting of a node for each index and a node for each episode. Each
index node has a connection to those episode nodes indexed under that index.
An intersection net for our example is shown in Figure 8.9.

A marking algorithm (Quillian, 1968; McCarthy et al., 1965, pp. 42-43) is
employed for retrieval. Given a collection of retrieval indices, the connections
from each index to each episode are traversed

and a mark count

>The application of episodes in daydreaming is discussed in Chapter 4.

associated

8.4.

INTERSECTION INDEXING

emot=neg

ep1

emot=pos

ep2

209

obj = chair

obj = lamp

ep3

ep4

Figure 8.9: Intersection Indexing Net

with the episode (initially zero) is incremented. Whenever the mark count
of a given episode reaches a certain threshold specified by that episode, that
episode is retrieved. The number of indices required for retrieval is determined
on an episode by episode basis. If all indices are required for retrieval of a
given episode, the threshold specified with that episode should be equal to the
number of connections to that episode. Often, however, it is desired to retrieve
an episode when some percentage of its indices are active. In DAYDREAMER,
episodes are indexed in a redundant fashion so that retrieval is possible even if
only some of a given episode’s indices are active.
Index intersection is in the spirit of spreading activation, but without all its
disadvantages. It is similar to the nets used in PANDEMONIUM (Selfridge,
1959). Because only one level of links is traversed, the retrieval algorithm is
not expensive. The number of links traversed is equal to the total number of
episodes connected to the given indices. Nor does intersection indexing have
the prohibitive space requirements of a fully redundant discrimination net.
At any time, DAYDREAMER maintains a short list of active indices. Whenever an episode is retrieved (using the currently active indices), the remaining
indices of that episode are activated. Active indices and intersection indexing
are illustrated in the daydream ROVINGI (see page 5). An episode at Gulliver’s

Restaurant (recalled directly by the ROVING daydreaming goal) activates the
indices of Marina del Rey (the location of the restaurant) and Steve (a character
in the episode). The index of Marina del Rey in turn leads to retrieval of an
episode (whose reminding threshold is one index) involving a job located there.
Retrieval of this episode in turn activates the index of Venice (a town along the
bus route to the job). Now the combined active indices of Steve and Venice,
resulting from two different episodes, lead to the retrieval of a third episode
(whose reminding threshold is two indices) involving Steve at Venice Beach.

a

Lsa

a

ee

aS
cca Gat
has eat pal Be Baval Nig
Dir aires: o 2 i

7 _
astcae

s Ue

\Craennt Aly
en
Agate
eee ie he dlngtes
Aer imont aa, Reed

Gexie na

wet

eteta a nas tie

al

fades

hat

7%

ii yi pica se.jee

iat 02
raetk

cia ested ae

Aas

a

A

;

S| oes
at. eS
dh

eae

ute

ot Gctie ines
yg adtaetigi Yi ic

efine). Tatham

Aa a

3 aa rege Lara tie ah Lot

edi”

j

SHY hi

Mi Peat

wi} nbd he

oc]Sati1phag earot
cil pat onaR
S
ri ‘!)Leni grillaidasre “eel
a
Mcr is | “fd:
ot, ci Sa Aidee
et”

Feu iter

yan» ‘4

tadashi are

isFaa Vag .¥ acli vf fee: ed Tae

et
fis yas ania ss pay ANG}
Laie oe‘Glait Poa ot if} rail ie
HEas 36 we.

wove.

a Raker in A a . ut asa) f7 i POUT in

a!

ies

sia! % ore Pict ath
it Tn Digits 0) oheo!l nui
iy batt trap Pibengeniv's|

nt eigen
aan
ay

8) yeiaeY

Ago

hus
ction

i!

reac

wi oad; Lown 7 syalePenge.erty

eaaiehasi ‘aves

diet
S—-

ie

adieoed

bath

|
*

RS, yonicenne,. subd writs Srbeag, Bhd soupsandide

th tai
ti Wet

hed ‘i
ented

_A asking

etre?
US i Rote PRN LAYi} %ching an
tk
ai ll 0wb anh! S gota att Aeon
|at
Poulweafy i. bien. palustre paoiier)
#

lo xahei od evlaVieon cms ol afnmiqe wildbee

rmArr oh pase.
|

gil Be

vey Lert ip ea 4 Bg vay Lis Yel! on iy bs nae
:

tslew

L

om.

as « .

-

et!

We Oi chayihy pees twice
ay

4nd!

mele

Gy ee

SS

of, MACathy ai
mya

‘

hel

re:
4

vil ret eval
werrce

wt

and

Ls

» (leasemet’

pid Uri

a2

ee

Chapter 9

Review of the Literature
on Daydreaming
Although the present work is, to our knowledge, the first theory of daydreaming
implemented as a running computer program, over the years many investigators
have discussed, researched, and theorized about daydreaming and the related
phenomenon of night dreaming. Our theory has been enormously influenced
by—and is indebted to—much of this previous work, which is reviewed in this
chapter.

9.1

Previous Work in Daydreaming

This section reviews past work in daydreaming, from the associationist theories
of long ago to modern psychological research into the human stream of thought.

9.1.1

Associationist Theories of Thought

The earliest theories of daydreaming are based on the principle of association
first formulated by Aristotle (Beare, 1931)—that ideas experienced together or
in close succession tend to become linked, so that when one of those ideas is later
thought of, the others are likely also to follow. Aristotle was concerned with the
role of association in memory. He proposed that when one wishes to recall a
given experience, one first selects an experience associated with that experience
(via contiguity in space or time, similarity, or contrast) and then the desired
experience follows automatically (H. C. Warren, 1921). In Leviathan, Hobbes

(1651/1968) proposed that thinking is partially determined by the principle of
association:

211

212 CHAPTER

9. REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

ON DAYDREAMING

All Fancies are Motions within us, reliques of those made in the
Sense:! And those motions that immediately succeeded one another
in the sense, continue also together after Sense. ... But because in
sense, to one and the same thing perceived, sometimes one thing,
sometimes another succeedeth, it comes to passe in time, that in the
Imagining of any thing, there is no certainty what we shall Imagine
next; Onely this is certain, it shall be something that succeeded the
same before, at one time or another. (ch. 3, pp. 8-9)

Hobbes distinguished two kinds of thinking governed by this principle—unguzded
and regulated:
This Trayne of Thoughts, or Mentall Discourse, is of two sorts. The
first is Unguided, without Designe, and inconstant ...In which case
the thoughts are said to wander, and seem impertinent one to another, as in a Dream. Such are Commonly the thoughts of men,
that are not onely without company, but also without care of any
thing; though even then their Thoughts are as busie as at other times
... And yet in this wild ranging of the mind, a man may oft-times
perceive the way of it, and the dependance of one thought upon another. For in a Discourse of our present civill warre, what could seem

more impertinent, than to ask (as one did) what was the value of a
Roman Penny? Yet the Cohzrence to me was manifest enough. For
the Thought of the warre, introduced the Thought of the delivering
up the King to his Enemies; The Thought of that, brought in the
Thought of the delivering up of Christ; and that again the Thought
of the 30 pence, which was the price of that treason: and thence
easily followed that malicious question; and all this in a moment of
time; for Thought is quick.
The second is more constant; as being regulated by some desire,
and designe. ...From Desire, ariseth the Thought of some means
we have seen produce the like of that which we ayme at; and from
the thought of that, the thought of means to that mean; and so
continually, till we come to some beginning within our won power.
(cho. peg)
Thus Hobbes recognized a classic form of daydreaming—undirected thought,
carried out when one is otherwise unoccupied—and the fact that this thought
follows a certain progression. He also recognized the form of thought which is
directed by desires (goals) and consists of what we would now call planning.
After Hobbes, other British associationists—John Locke, David Hume,
David Hartley, James Mill, John Stuart Mill, Alexander Bain, among others—
continued to develop and explore the principle of association; however, the basic
1By “Sense,” Hobbes means sensory experience.

9.1.

PREVIOUS

WORK IN DAYDREAMING

213

notions remained the same. H. C. Warren (1921) and Rapaport (1974) provide
detailed reviews, not repeated here, of the work of these and other philosophers
and psychologists.
There are several problems with strictly associationist theories of daydreaming: First, associationist theories do not account for the fact that, out of the
multitude of ideas associated with a given idea, only a small number of those
ideas actually come to mind. After all, when one sees a cat, one is not overwhelmed with every idea and experience associated in some way with cats. More
likely, one will be reminded of a cat one once knew, or recall that one has to
pick up some cat food at the grocery store. If associations only partially determine the thoughts which follow a given thought, what are the other factors
which select a single thought? How is this thought selected depending on the
particular context?
Second, associationist theories lack a theory of representation of concepts.
How, for example, does one form associations based on similarity (if such associations are viewed as distinct from those based on space and time contiguity)?
When two ideas are claimed to be similar, what, exactly, is similar about those
ideas? How are two ideas recognized to be similar? How are ideas represented
in the first place?
Third, associationist theories of daydreaming do not account for its generative aspect. Thought does not consist merely of the reproduction of past
ideas, but rather involves the construction of new ideas out of existing ideas
and components of existing ideas. For example, it is possible for one to imagine a hypothetical sequence of events which one has never before imagined or
experienced in that particular combination.
Associationism has been revived in recent years under the names of spreading
activation (Quillian, 1968; J. R. Anderson, 1983) and connectionism (Rumelhart et al., 1986). This work has suggested solutions to some of the problems
associated with classical associationism. Nonetheless, difficult problems remain.
Our view is that in order for associationist mechanisms to be useful, they
must be extended with other processing mechanisms and with rich conceptual

representations.

As, for example, James (1890a, pp.

571-577) has proposed,

other factors such as recency, vividness, and emotional congruity must be employed in order to select from among multiple associations. The important
problem thus becomes that of representation: How are experiences represented?
What representations enable recognition of salient, important, and interesting
experiences?

9.1.2

James’s Stream of Thought

It was James (1890a) who introduced the phrases “stream of thought”

and

“stream of consciousness” in a chapter of his Principles of Psychology. There he
discusses five characteristics of thought, briefly summarized (without bothering
to discuss possible objections) as follows:

214 CHAPTER

9. REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

ON DAYDREAMING

e Thoughts are unique to a particular personal consciousness;
directly know the thoughts of another consciousness.

one cannot

e Thought is constantly changing; a thought state can never be identical to
a past thought state; even a particular fact is seen from a new angle each
time the same fact recurs in thought.
e Thought is a continuous stream; despite any time gaps (due to sleep, coma,
and so on) or breaks in the quality of consciousness, there is continuity
of the self; changes in the quality of consciousness are never “absolutely
abrupt”; the stream of thought consists of a series of flights from one
resting point to another.

e Thought need not distinguish between the object of thought and thought
itself; thoughts are not composed out of other thoughts, but, rather, are
undivided entities.
e At any time, thought chooses one part of its object over another; presented
with many sensations, thought selects certain ones and rejects others.

9.1.3

Freud’s Theory of Dreaming and Daydreaming

S. Freud’s (1900/1965, 1908/1962) theory of daydreaming is based on his influential theory of night dreaming. The fundamental assumption of this theory
is that dreams are significant—that is, rather than being random nonsense,
dreams have a coherent meaning. Furthermore, this meaning is hidden: The
dream recalled upon awakening—the “manifest dream” or “dream-content” —is
distinguished from the underlying substance of the dream—the “latent dream”
or “dream-thoughts.”
It is the operation of “censorship” which inhibits the
direct expression of the unconscious dream-thoughts in consciousness and thus
in the manifest dream. The dream-thoughts may be represented in the dreamcontent only once they have been appropriately distorted. At the core of the
dream-thoughts is a repressed infantile wish. Each manifest dream involves the
fulfillment, in disguise, of such an wish.
Freud proposes that dreams are instigated by significant recent events as
well as significant recent internal experiences (such as a train of thought or
memory experienced during the day). These significant experiences, which stir
up repressed wishes, are concealed in the manifest dream.
The technique of “free association” is used to interpret a dream—that is, to
uncover the latent dream corresponding to a manifest dream. In this technique,
the patient is to notice and report to the psychoanalyst any and all thoughts
which come to mind regarding elements of the dream. The patient must allow
thoughts to enter into consciousness no matter how unimportant, absurd, or
unpleasant those thoughts may seem. The purpose of dream interpretation is
to discover pathological ideas (as part of the dream-thoughts) responsible for

9.1.

PREVIOUS

WORK IN DAYDREAMING

215

the patient’s problems; it is theorized that these stuctures may be removed by
unraveling them in psychotherapy.

The “dream-work” transforms the dream-thoughts into the dream-content
through “condensation” and “dream-displacement.” Condensation represents
many elements of the dream-thoughts as a much smaller number of elements
of the dream-content. The reduction does not occur, for example, by a process
of omission, but through the selection of “nodal points’ upon which a great

number of the dream-thoughts [converge] ...” (S. Freud, 1900/1965, p. 317)
(Note the similarity of this mechanism to that of spreading activation.) Each
element of the manifest dream is therefore overdetermined—determined by many
elements of the latent dream. It is also possible for single elements of the dreamthoughts to be represented by several elements of the dream-content. In dreamdisplacement, the “center” of the dream-content—that is, the apparent nucleus
of significance in the dream-content—is skewed so that it does not correspond
with the “center” of the dream-thoughts—the true nucleus of significance.
The methods of “composition” and “identification” enable condensation and
dream-displacement: In composition, several persons having some significant element in common in the dream-thoughts are represented in the dream-content
as a single, composite figure derived from those persons. However, in this composite figure the significant element is deemphasized or dropped, and indifferent
features unique to one or other of the persons are combined and emphasized. In
identification, the several persons are represented as one of those persons and indifferent aspects of that person are emphasized. Identification and composition
enable dream-displacement by representing insignificant elements as significant
in the manifest dream, and by avoiding representation of significant elements.
Freud notes that emotions in dreams often do not correspond to those one
might experience if one were to encounter the situation represented in the dream
while awake—for example, one may feel fear when there appears to be nothing in the dream to fear, or one may fail to experience fear in a dream in
which there is much to fear. In order to account for this, he proposes that al- though ideational material of the dream-thoughts is transformed, the emotions
remain unchanged. Thus each emotion in the manifest dream may be traced to
some dream-thought. In addition, he proposes that emotions associated with
dream-thoughts may be suppressed and that emotions can be turned into their
opposite—both consequences of the censorship of dreams.

“Secondary revision” is the process whereby a manifest dream is rendered
more coherent—in a fashion similar to the way waking thought imposes order on
perceptual material. Secondary revision, operating simultaneously with other
dream processes, “seeks to mould the material offered to it into something like
a day-dream.” (S. Freud, 1900/1965, p. 530) Alternatively, if an appropriate,
possibly unconscious, daydream has already been formed, secondary revision
may adopt this daydream and incorporate it—in part or in whole—into the

216 CHAPTER 9. REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

ON DAYDREAMING

dream-content.”
Freud proposes that daydreams, like dreams, are fulfillments of an ungratified
wish:

Like dreams, [daydreams] are wish-fulfilments; like dreams, they are
based to a great extent on impressions of infantile experiences; like
dreams, they benefit by a certain degree of relaxation of censorship.
If we examine their structure, we shall perceive the way in which
the wishful purpose that is at work in their production has mixed
up the material of which they are built, has re-arranged it and has

formed it into a new whole ...(S. Freud, 1900/1965, p. 530)
The motive forces of phantasies are unsatisfied wishes, and every
single phantasy is the fulfilment of a wish, a correction of unsatisfying reality. These motivating wishes ... fall naturally into two main
groups. They are either ambitious wishes ...or they are erotic ones.
...(S. Freud, 1908/1962, pp. 146-147)

S. Freud (1908/1962) also proposes that daydreaming arises as a substitute
for childhood play:
[T]he growing child, when he stops playing, gives up nothing but
the link with real objects; instead of playing, he now phantasves.
He builds castles in the air and creates what are called day-dreams
este 40)

9.1.4

Bleuler’s Autistic Thinking

Bleuler (1912/1951) discusses a form of thought similar to daydreaming called
“autistic thinking.”
Autistic thinking occurs in the thought processes of
schizophrenics who have withdrawn into a dream world, ignore reality, and
fulfill their wishes—or believe themselves to be persecuted—in their delusions.
Bleuler characterizes autistic thinking, which is present to some degree in every
person, as follows:
e Autistic thinking is concerned with the fulfillment of wishes; it seeks pleasant ideas and avoids painful ones.
e Affects strive to perpetuate themselves in autistic thinking; ideas which
are in accord with a given affect are favored over those which are not. For
example, a depressed person tends to continue to have negative thoughts.
2S. Freud (1900/1965, pp. 533-537) proposes that such a mechanism accounts for dreams
which (it is claimed) occur instantaneously or in compressed time (see, for example, Maury,
1878): The entire daydream does not have to be reviewed while asleep; it only must be
“touched on.” The daydream is then later elaborated when the dream is recalled while awake.

This is similar to the “cassette theory of dreams” discussed by Dennett (1978, pp. 136-144).

Incidentally, recent dream research seems to indicate that dream time is proportional (Dement
& Kleitman, 1957) or identical (LaBerge, 1985, pp. 74-78) to real time, despite the myth of
accelerated dreaming.

9.1.

PREVIOUS

WORK IN DAYDREAMING

217

e Autistic thinking ignores the rules of logic, allows the impossible to be
possible, overlooks obstacles, and assumes goals have been attained that
have not.
e Autistic thinking permits contradictory wishes to be maintained simultaneously. For example, in autistic thinking one may wish to be a carefree
child and a powerful executive at the same time.
e Autistic thinking disregards time relationships—an old memory can become real again.
Bleuler states that a degree of autism may be of some use in everyday life;
however, an excessive amount can have negative consequences.
Bleuler explains the prevalence of autistic thinking in the play of children,
in daydreaming, in dreams, in mythology, and in pathological phenomena as
follows:

e Autistic thinking provides a means of achieving pleasure, which is an adaptive goal in humans: “the anticipated pleasure enforces consideration and
preparation prior to an endeavor and enhances the energy of the striving.”
(p. 434)
e Autistic thinking enables the abreaction of (releasing of the repressed emotion resulting from) negative experiences.
e Autistic thinking provides exercise for thinking ability (especially in chil-

dren).
e Autistic thinking enables one to overestimate the value of a goal and to
overlook potential obstacles; this increases the desire to achieve the goal
and decreases the possibility of becoming discouraged.

9.1.5

Varendonck’s

Psychology of Daydreaming

J. Varendonck published a book in 1921 called The Psychology of Day-dreams
containing retrospective reports of over 30 of his own daydreams, detailed analyses of many of these daydreams, and conclusions regarding the process of
daydreaming (or what he calls “fore-conscious thought” as distinguished from
unconscious and conscious thought).2 Based on my own tabulation, about onethird of the reported daydreams occurred before falling asleep at night, another
3Rapaport (1951) has pointed out that Varendonck’s term “fore-conscious” stems from a
misunderstanding of Freud’s constructs: The “unconscious” refers to thoughts which have a
resistance to becoming conscious, while the “preconscious” refers to thoughts, not currently
conscious, which may become conscious at any time. Thus one does not say that dreaming is
carried out through “unconscious thought,” although the study of dreaming is useful in uncovering unconscious thoughts (S. Freud, 1900/1965). Similarly, daydreaming is not carried out

preconsciously (or fore-consciously). We may assume that in using the term “fore-conscious,”
Varendonck simply wanted to suggest the special state of consciousness in which daydreaming
appears to occur and its involuntary, undirected nature.

218 CHAPTER

9. REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

ON DAYDREAMING

third while reading (during the day or in the morning or night in bed), and the
remainder before getting up in the morning, while on a train, while walking,
and during a conversation. Although many of Varendonck’s reported daydreams
occurred prior to sleep, few of them have the nonsensical or bizarre quality characteristic of the hypnagogic reveries common in the transition from wakefulness
to sleep. Varendonck was probably in a wakeful state when the reported daydreams occurred—in many instances he admits that he was having trouble getting to sleep. We may thus consider Varendonck’s presleep reveries as bona fide
“daydreams” (see, however, Wallas, 1926, pp. 72-74, for an alternative view).
Varendonck (1921) postulates that daydream sequences originate with an
emotionally-emphasized recollection, which is triggered through association with
an external stimulus or with “ideas which are selected experimentally” (p. 40),
or which “simply obtrudes itself upon” (p. 179) one’s attention. Often the
memory is a “day remnant” (or recent experience). For example, one of Varendonck’s daydreams was triggered by the sound of an exploding shell outside,
which reminded him of a previous shell that was dropped on the village a week
earlier causing many casualties.
Once started, a daydream, according to Varendonck, is composed of a sequence of hypotheses and rejoinders which attempt to solve one or more problems or satisfy one or more wishes. Each hypothesis is a suggestion, supposition,

or question (often of the form “What if ...?” or “How shall I...?”). Each rejoinder is an objection to, rejection of, or acceptance of the suggestion, or an
answer to the question. For example, Varendonck had the following experience when he was working in a Belgian military hospital: An orderly brought a
request from the head nurse to Varendonck but “spoke and behaved so impo-

litely that [Varendonck] flatly refused to grant it” (Varendonck, 1921, p. 64).
The orderly left threatening Varendonck with the vengeance of the head nurse.
Varendonck then sent a letter to his commanding offi¢er demanding punishment
of the orderly. The same night while trying to get to sleep, Varendonck had a
daydream concerned with ensuring the proper punishment of (or taking revenge
on) the orderly. He analyzes a portion of this daydream into hypotheses and
rejoinders as follows:

What if I warned [the head nurse] (so as to dispose her in my favour
and arouse her feelings against the culprit)? I start composing the
letter.

If I enclosed my visiting-card? No reply (suggestion accepted).
If I asked Captain Y. to send his corporal with it? He is too busy.

And if he went after office-hours? No reply (suggestion accepted).
If I added a copy of my report? A great waste of time to copy it.
If I tore my own report out of my notebook?

I might still want it.

If I asked her to return it? (Understood: she might not do so.)

9.1.

PREVIOUS WORK IN DAYDREAMING

219

If I went to see her myself? I shall put on my best uniform.
If I handed my card to an orderly and asked for an interview?
(Suggestion accepted and visualized, as well as the interview itself.)
s.+ (Dp. 75-76)
Varendonck concludes that such hypotheses and rejoinders which attempt to
solve a problem (such as how to punish the orderly) are generated through the
adaptation of previous memories: “The content of every single created thought,
in the form either of a question or an answer, is nothing else than an element
borrowed from the store of memory and applied to the present need as created

by an affect.” (Varendonck, 1921, p. 183)
According to Varendonck, a daydream terminates “at a moment of mental
passivity under the influence of some affect which causes [streams of thought] to

rise to the surface ...” (p. 180) or when another memory is recalled in response
to an external stimulus.

9.1.6

Green’s Study of Daydreaming and Development

G. H. Green (1923) explored the relationship of daydreaming to childhood development. He proposed several stages, each marked by daydreams of a particular theme: In the “age of imagination,” beginning around the third year, the
play and daydreams of the child are concerned with an imaginary companion.
By the next stage, beginning around the tenth year, daydreams are no longer
accompanied by external actions; the “gang or team fantasies” of this stage
involve the daydreamer as the leader of a group engaged in some adventure or
quest. In the “romantic fantasy” stage, beginning around the fourteenth year,
the daydreamer imagines being with a companion of the opposite sex—sitting
or walking together in beautiful surroundings.
Green views daydreams as fulfillments and temporary partial gratifications
of repressed infantile wishes (as does Freud), and as representing an unconscious
enduring attitude toward the world.

9.1.7

The Research of Singer and Colleagues

J. L. Singer and McCraven (1961) developed a daydream questionnaire in order
to answer such questions as: How frequent is daydreaming in different samples
of the general population? What is the typical content of daydreaming? Does
the frequency and content of daydreaming depend on the age, sex, and other
background factors of the individual? Do certain patterns of daydreaming go
together? The questionnaire was composed of a large number of daydreams
collected from various sources. Subjects were to report whether they had experienced a given daydream and with what frequency. The earliest versions of
the questionnaire contained daydreams such as “I suddenly find I can fly, to the

220 CHAPTER 9. REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

ON DAYDREAMING

amazement of passers-by” and “I picture an atomic bombing of the town I live
in” (J. L. Singer, 1975, p. 53).
Over the years, this questionnaire evolved into what is now called the Imag-

inal Processes Inventory (IPI) (J. L. Singer & Antrobus, 1963, 1972), consist-

ing of 344 items divided into 28 groups. The IPI contains items representing
common daydreams, as well as statements designed to assess other personality
characteristics of the individual. Each item of the IPI is rated by the individual
along a 5-point scale according to how true that statement is of that person. A
few items from the IPI are as follows:

Daydreams or fantasies make up ___% of my waking thoughts. (2)
In my daydreams, I have succeeded in becoming a respected figure
in my field of work. (106)
I often wonder about the life of a person I happen to see standing
at a window of an apartment building. (123)
While reading, I often slip into daydreams about sex or making love
to someone. (244)
I see myself attaining revenge against someone who has deceived me.
(342)
J. L. Singer (1975) concludes from the results of administering such questionnaires to many individuals that:

[D]aydreaming is a remarkably widespread occurrence when people
are alone and in restful motor states. It is a human function that
chiefly involves resort to visual imagery and is strongly oriented toward future interpersonal behavior. (p. 55)
Several studies (Cundiff & Gold, 1979; Giambra, 1977; J. L. Singer &
Antrobus, 1972) have supported the reliability of the IPI. That is, when subjects
are tested more than once they are consistent in their responses.
Factor analyses of responses to the IPI (J. L. Singer & Antrobus, 1963,
1972; Huba, Segal, & J. L. Singer, 1977; Giambra, 1980; Segal, Huba, & J.
L. Singer, 1980) have yielded at least the following three major factors: The
“positive-vivid” factor is associated with individuals who daydream frequently,
whose daydreams are accompanied by positive emotions and vivid sensory imagery, and who employ daydreaming for constructive problem solving. The
“guilty-dysphoric” factor is associated with individuals whose daydreams have
a negative emotional character, and whose daydreams reflect guilt and self-doubt
on the one hand, and a striving for achievement on the other. The “anxious-

distractible” factor is associated with individuals having difficulty attending to
tasks, and whose daydreams are characterized by fleeting thoughts and accompanied by anxiety and worry.
J. L. Singer and McCraven (1961) found cultural differences in the content
and frequency of daydreaming; other individual differences have been found as

9.1.

PREVIOUS

WORK IN DAYDREAMING

22h

well. Since the literature on this topic is quite extensive, the reader is referred

to the reviews of J. L. Singer (1978) and McNeil (1985).

J. L. Singer (1974, pp. 247-248) views long-term memory as an active process, normally just outside our awareness, in which items are constantly replayed
and rehearsed; when we are otherwise unoccupied, we become aware of this internal source of stimulation and make use of its contents in daydreaming. J. L.
Singer and colleagues have conducted various studies to investigate the relationship of external and internal sources of stimulation. In these studies, the subject
sits in a darkened, soundproof cubicle and either listens to tones via a pair of
headphones or watches lights. The subject is to perform a “signal detection”
task—to press a button in order to discriminate, for example, low from high

tones or bright from dim light flashes.

One study (Antrobus & J. L. Singer, 1964) found that subjects engaged in
counting out loud, rather than continuous free association, while performing the
signal detection task were more likely to report themselves as feeling drowsy.
Subjects engaged in counting rather than free association were also found to
produce a greater degree of accuracy in the signal detection task. These results
suggest that although daydreaming serves to maintain arousal while performing
a boring task, it also reduces accuracy in that task.

In another set of experiments (Antrobus, J. L. Singer, & Greenberg, 1966),
subjects were interrupted at regular intervals while performing a signal detection task and asked to report whether any task-irrelevant thoughts occurred
since the last interruption. An increase in the rate of the signals was found to
correspond with a decrease in the amount of task-irrelevant thought. Nonetheless, even when the signal rate was increased, a certain minimum amount of
task-irrelevant thought was found to persist. When, while waiting to perform
the experiment, subjects heard a fake radio broadcast telling of an escalation
in the Vietnam war and draft calls, the amount of task-irrelevant thought was
found to increase substantially. However, the error rate in the signal detection
task was not significantly worse, suggesting to the researchers a greater “bandwidth” or capacity for processing both internal and external material than they
had expected.
J. L. Singer (1975) proposes the following functions for daydreaming in humans: generating solutions to life problems; planning and rehearsing future
actions; achieving positive mood states by diverting attention from negative
thoughts to more positive fantasies (in contrast to catharsis theories of daydreaming); self-entertainment and maintaining arousal in boring situations; increasing the probability of recalling, and dealing with, unfinished business; and,
in general, enriching our daily lives. He also proposes that adult daydreaming
evolves out of childhood pretend play. As a child grows up, the overt play, by
and large frowned upon by society, is gradually internalized until it is exclusively
carried out in the form of private daydreaming.

222 CHAPTER

9.1.8

9. REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

ON DAYDREAMING

Klinger’s Theory of Fantasy

In Structure and Functions of Fantasy, Klinger (1971) proposes a psychological
theory of fantasy. He defines fantasy as verbal reports of mental activity other
than problem-solving in a goal-oriented situation, and other than the scanning
of external stimuli or orienting responses to external stimuli. Klinger intends
this definition to exclude thoughts concerned with explicit planning of future
events (but to include thoughts about the possible course of future events).
Klinger proposes

that fantasies are composed

of a sequence

of segments

(called “main routines”) consisting of homogeneous thematic content.

These

main routines may be further broken down into “subroutines,” which may be
further broken down into “sub-subroutines,” and so on—fantasies may thus be
represented in terms of a tree structure. High agreement between two judges
segmenting fantasies into main routines was found and moderately high agreement was found at the subroutine level.
Klinger classifies thought segments into two types: operant and respondent
(after Skinner, 1935). A parallel is drawn between respondent and operant
behavior, and primary and secondary process thought (S. Freud, 1900/1965):
respondent behavior and primary process thought are both initiated involuntarily and unconcerned with feedback fron: the external environment, while
operant behavior and secondary process thought are both initiated voluntarily
and directed and modified in response to feedback indicating whether the activity accomplishes a given objective. Operant behavior is accompanied by a
greater sense of mental effort than respondent behavior. Fantasy, dreams, and
play are all viewed as instances of primarily respondent sequences. Jung (1916)
makes a similar distinction between directed thinking—primarily carried out in
words and with effort—and dream or phantasy thought—primarily carried out
in images. He argues that phantastic thinking in present-day humans retains a
condensation of mythical material from the past of humankind; modern science,
on the other hand, is an example of directed thinking.

Klinger defines a “current concern” as the state of having initiated a behavioral sequence for attaining an anticipated incentive or goal state. A current
concern persists until the goal is either achieved or abandoned. Current con-

cerns lead to respondent segments concerned with the means for achieving the
associated goals, but only if the odds of success are in doubt. In part, Klinger’s
current concerns inspired the “concern” construct of DAYDREAMER.
Klinger argues that concepts such as motives and needs are too coarsegrained to account for moment-to-moment shifts in fantasy. Instead, he proposes
the following account of transitions from one segment to another: A segment
related to one current concern may contain an element or cue related to another
concern. This induces a shift to a segment related to that other concern. He
later called this the “induction principle.” (Klinger, 1978)

9.1.

PREVIOUS

9.1.9

WORK IN DAYDREAMING

223

Pope’s Studies of the Stream of Thought

Pope (1978) conducted several experiments in order to investigate the effects of
solitude, posture, and gender on daydreaming. He also compared think-aloud
protocols with a nonverbal method of report: A key-press device was hooked up
to a polygraph recorder and subjects were instructed to hold down a “present”
or “absent” button depending on the current topic of thought.
Clear differences were found between the think-aloud and key-press methods
of report. The number of segments was about five times greater in the key-press
method than in either the subject-rated or judge-rated think-aloud reports.
Frequency and cumulative duration of “present” segments were also greater
for the key-press method. Pope reports that “many participants expressed the
difficulty of putting their thoughts into words and doing so quickly enough

so that they neither slowed down their thoughts nor left our [sic] parts of a
description because they were in a hurry or because they could not find the

right words.”

(Pope, 1978, p. 262)

The majority of the time seemed to be spent in activities such as recalling
past experiences or future fantasies. Only about 35-55% of the segments and
about 30-40% of the 5-minute period was found to be concerned with the present
(percentages not varying with the method of reporting).

9.1.10

Shanon’s Investigation of Thought Sequences

Shanon (1981) collected a corpus of daydream protocols and wrote a brief paper
summarizing the patterns revealed in the investigation of those protocols. He
posits several “local mappings” for generating the next thought in a sequence
given the previous thought.
The “association” and “content” mappings produce what we would call remindings, through the use of stored or generated (inferred) links between perceptual objects, concepts, or episodes. Thus “hearing a tune” may be followed
by “N. introduced me to this singer.”
“Formal” mappings consist of structural transformations on thoughts such
as negation, generalization, specification, and interrogation. So, for example,
“to ask R. about it” may be mapped through the operation of generalization
to “to ask adults about it.” Although Shanon does not provide examples of
these mechanisms, we assume that negation of “to ask R. about it” produces
“not to ask R. about it” and that interrogation produces “why ask R. about it?”
Such transformations may be related to the action mutations of DAYDREAMER
discussed in Chapter 5 and to the transforms of Colby (1963), among other
proposals.
“Symbol” mappings involve a “shift in the perspective” of a thought: “Eating spaghetti with a spoon” is followed by “why isn’t there a tool that will
keep the noodles and let the liquid pass,” which in turn is followed by “fork.”
This example seems to be related to planning. In the other example of sym-

224 CHAPTER 9. REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

ON DAYDREAMING

bol mappings, “(reading) I draw my finger across her forehead” is followed by
“An image of myself drawing my finger across L.’s forehead.” If I understand
this example correctly, it appears to consist of the analogical application of an
episode involving a character in a story to a daydream involving the self.
Shanon also makes some interesting suggestions that thought sequences involve “shifts of levels,” “interactions,” and triggering of thoughts by “partially
specified” constituents (but, unfortunately, does not elaborate on these mecha-

nisms).

9.2

Related Work in Night Dreaming

As might be expected from its name, daydreaming* is similar in many respects
to night dreaming: Both involve a withdrawal from the external environment,
both involve a sort of “waking up,” both consist of fanciful, somewhat unrealistic
sequences of events, both involve imagery, and both are difficult to recall without
practice.
However, there are also several differences: Dreaming is carried out while
asleep, daydreaming while awake; dreaming thus involves near complete isola-

tion from the external environment (Foulkes, 1966), while in daydreaming one is
to varying degrees aware of the external environment and receptive to external

stimuli (Klinger, 1978).
Like daydreams, the plots of dreams are coherent (Foulkes, 1985). However,
dreams seem to involve a greater degree of bizarre juxtapositions of elements
and transitions from one event to another. The events of a dream are less to
be taken at face value than those of a daydream: Dreamed situations are often

metaphors for current problems of the dreamer (Baylor & Deslauriers, 1986),
whereas in daydreams current concerns are represented directly (Klinger, 1971).
The imagery in dreams is realistic and lifelike, whereas in daydreaming it
is more vague. In dreaming we think we are experiencing real events, while
in daydreaming we know the events are imaginary. Nonetheless, there are exceptions: First, in waking thought, one may sometimes believe the imagined
events are actually occurring: For example, in a study reported by Foulkes and
Fleisher (1975), subjects were interrupted at random while lying down in a state
of relaxed wakefulness. In 19 percent of the content-producing interruptions,

subjects described their thoughts as hallucinatory. Posey and Losch (1983) administered a questionnaire to 375 normal subjects; 71 percent reported having
4The earliest known occurrence of the English word “daydream” reported by the Ozford
English Dictionary is from 1685: “And when awake, thy soul but nods at best, Day dreams
and sickly thoughts revolving in thy breast.” “Dream” meaning “thoughts, images, or fancies
passing through the mind during sleep” seems to have appeared first in Middle English (first
reported quotation circa 1250), while the first reported quotation for “dream” in the sense of
indulging in “fancies or day-dreams” occurs in 1533. The first quotation for “fantasy” in the
sense of “imagination” is from 1589.

9.2,

RELATED

WORK IN NIGHT DREAMING

225

experienced auditory hallucinations involving voices in wakeful situations. Second, sometimes one may be aware that one is dreaming (LaBerge, 1985; C. E.
Green, 1968; S. Freud, 1900/1965, pp. 610-611). In such a case, however, the
events of the dream still seem real. Third, some thought activity during sleep
may lack vivid visual imagery and more resemble daydreaming than classical
night dreaming:
The impression is that NREM mentation resembles that large portion of our waking thought that wanders in a seemingly disorganized, drifting, nondirected fashion whenever we are not attending
to external stimuli or actively working out a problem or daydream.
(Dement, 1976, p. 44)
There are other interesting relationships between daydreaming and dreaming as
well. The author has consistently observed, for example, that it is possible to
think to oneself—that is, to daydream—about the current situation in a dream.
Thus it appears that daydreaming is possible within dreaming.
Is there similarity in the content of the dreams and daydreams of a par-

ticular individual? Klinger (1971, p. 55) concludes that there is little evidence to this effect. However, experiments conducted by Starker (1982, pp.
62-68) demonstrated a correspondence between the IPI daydreaming factor of
a subject (discussed earlier) and the emotional tone, length, and strangeness
of that subject’s dreams: Dreams of “guilty-dysphoric” daydreamers contained
more negative emotions than those of “positive-vivid” daydreamers; dreams of
“anxious-distractible” daydreamers were somewhat longer and stranger than
those of “guilty-dysphoric” daydreamers; and dreams of “positive-vivid” daydreamers were shorter, less strange, and contained less negative emotions than
those of “anxious-distractible” daydreamers.
Because of the relationship of night dreaming and daydreaming, in this section we review previous work in night dreaming which is relevant to the present
research. We also briefly review two other forms of dreaming of potential relevance to our research—hypnagogic dreams and lucid dreams.

9.2.1

Foulkes’s Scoring System for Latent Structure

Foulkes (1978) proposed an explicit dream analysis technique called the Scoring

System for Latent Structure (SSLS) (which, unfortunately, was not implemented
as a computer program). This technique is used to analyze the private meaning of a dream given transcripts of the dream and free associations on each
part of the dream. The primary objectives of SSLS are: an understanding of
dream processes—those mechanisms whereby dream-thoughts are transformed
into dream-content—and a reliable method of dream interpretation for clinical
use—determining the dream-thoughts from the dream-content.
In this method of dream analysis, each conceptualization contained in the
dream and free association transcripts is coded as a subject-verb-object propo-

226 CHAPTER

9. REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

ON DAYDREAMING

sition (using a concise but cryptic set of special symbols).

Two

classes of

propositions— “interactive” and “associative” —are used to represent all conceptualizations. Interactive propositions may employ the following verbs: moving
toward (loving, helping, penetrating, and so on), moving from (withdrawing,
neglecting, and so on), moving against (being hostile to, destroying, and so
on), and creating (producing, discovering, nurturing, and so on). Associative
propositions may employ the verbs of with (associated with, near to, and so ou),

equivalence (being identical to), and means (serving as an medium for sustaining
some relationship).
Each segment of a dream report and each free association from a dream
element is called an “association chain.” From each association chain, an “association path” is formed as follows: The first element of the path is the first

element of the chain; the second element of the path is the remaining element of
the chain having the greatest number of nouns in common with the first element
of the path; the third element of the path is the remaining element of the chain
having the greatest number of nouns in common with the second element of the
path; and so on.
A network of interconnected associated noun elements called a “structuregram” is then formed from one or more association paths. If a composite structuregram is formed from all of the dream and free association paths, the complete set of transformations from dream-thoughts to dream-content is exposed.
Foulkes discusses how mathematical analysis may be applied to structuregrams
in order to find “condensing carriers,” “branch intersects,” “trunk condensers,”
and the like. Although such constructs may be interesting from the standpoint of digraph theory, it is not clear how they enrich one’s understanding of
a particular dream. Nonetheless, such investigations are somewhat useful in
the investigation of dream processes: For example, Foulkes provides a mathematical characterization of Freud’s dream-work processes of condensation and
displacement.

9.2.2

The Computer Analogy for Night Dreaming

Several researchers (C. Evans, 1983; C. Evans & Newman, 1964) have proposed
theories of night dreaming based on an analogy with computers. These theories
may be stated roughly as follows: The brain is controlled by a collection of
programs, many of them innate. These programs must continually be modified
in order to meet the changing demands of the world. However, this moditication
process may occur only when the brain is not receiving any new information from
the external world—that is, while a person is asleep. Dreams are what is recalled
of this activity of updating these programs in light of recent experiences. Evans
suggests that “dreaming may—in humans at least—be concerned with running
through and inspecting a social adaptation program, for it could be said that
young children who have had little actual social experience in the outside world
need to prepare for the interactions to come by staging their own nightly series of

9.2.

RELATED

WORK IN NIGHT DREAMING

227

internal dramas.” (p. 156) Note the similarity between this theory of dreaming
and our hypothesis that daydreaming serves the functions of learning from past
experiences and planning for the future. A. Maeder and Alfred Adler have also
previously proposed a planning or “thinking ahead” function for dreaming (S.
Freud, 1900/1965, p. 618, footnote 1).

9.2.3.

The Dream

Although DAYDREAMER

Simulation

of Moser

et al.

is (to the author’s knowledge)

the first computer

model of daydreaming, a computer simulation of night dreaming has previously
been constructed by Moser, Pfeifer, W. Schneider, Von Zeppelin, and H. Schnei-

der (1980, 1982). The simulation is based on psychoanalytic theory (S. Freud,
1900/1965), on a previous theory which views dreaming as attempting to deal
with unresolved conflicts (French, 1952, 1953), and on previous theories which
view dreaming as the deferred processing of daytime information (Ben-Aaron,

1975; Antrobus, 1977). The program (implemented in Lisp) simulates the production of two dreams originally reported during psychotherapeutic sessions.
The output is in propositional (rather than English) form.
In the theory of dreaming of Moser et al., a “latent conflict” or, as we call
it here, an “abstract wish,” is triggered by an experience during the day. An
abstract wish is the goal to perform an action which is prohibited by a rule of
the “superego.” An abstract wish consists of:
e an action

e desired attributes for the actor and objects of that action

e arule of the superego prohibiting the performance of certain instances of
this abstract wish (each rule of the superego is associated with a person

from whom the rule is derived [usually a parent] and who will enforce this
rule through punishment if it is violated)
e the extent to which the abstract wish has not been realizable in the past, or

the strength of the abstract wish (called NEGEM for “negative emotions”)
e the degree of the anxiety emotion to be expected upon fulfilling the abstract wish despite the superego rule (called ANX for “anticipated anxiety” )

Dreaming, in this theory, is broken into two phases: the “involvement phase”
and the “commitment phase.” In the involvement phase, defensive transformations are performed on an instance of the abstract wish in order to render it
acceptable to the superego. In the commitment phase, the transformed instance
of the abstract wish is achieved in a sequence of dreamed situations. Each such
situation consists of a setting, an action, an actor of the action, and objects of

228 CHAPTER

9. REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

ON DAYDREAMING

the action. The program implements the production of dreams given a list of
abstract wishes.
The operation of the program will be described in the context of how it
accounts for the production of the following “Manure Wagon Dream”:

I am fleeing with my brother in a wheat field. I don’t know what I
am fleeing from. I am in great fear. I am trying to hide. Suddenly I
see a manure wagon with a white liquid mush coming out the front.
I have the feeling that I absolutely have to have the mush. This gets
me into the conflict of being seen. But finally I go to the wagon all

the same and drink. The [sic] I wake up, I am depressed, but then
I laugh and say: “But the mush was good.” (Moser, Pfeifer, W.
Schneider, Von Zeppelin, & H. Schneider, 1980, p. 10)

The program is started with a list of abstract wishes reactivated during the
day. In the “Manure Wagon Dream,” instances of the two abstract wishes are

(a) to suck his brother’s male organ and ingest the product and (b) to suck
his mother’s breast and drink the milk. These abstract wishes are assumed
to have been reactivated by a “transference” situation: Although the analyst
usually provided the patient with a cigarette, the day before the patient had
the “Manure Wagon Dream” she refused to give him a cigarette.
The program is a loop which operates on one abstract wish at a time: The
current abstract wish is instantiated different ways, depending on the value of
the associated NEGEM. If NEGEM is small (as in the “Manure Wagon Dream” ),
the dreamer is selected as the actor. If NEGEM is large, the dreamer is selected
as a “spectator.” If NEGEM is very large, a “deanimated” (French, 1953) version of the dreamer is selected as the actor: The animate dreamer is transformed
into an inanimate object having as many of the desired actor attributes (specified
in the abstract wish) as possible. This is the case in the other dream modeled
by the program—in this other dream, the patient dreams she is a big beautiful
plum hanging from a tree. If NEGEM is very large, the action and setting are
chosen as described below, the situation is “expanded by a detailed description

of the [actor’s] attributes” (p. 74), and the program terminates (which models
waking up). Otherwise, if NEGEM is small or large, the program continues as
follows:
If the current abstract wish does not have an associated superego rule, the
commitment phase may begin. Otherwise, a suitable object for the action of the
abstract wish is selected according to the desired object attributes (specified in
the abstract wish) and the constraint that the object must enable the action
of the next abstract wish. In the “Manure Wagon Dream,” his brother’s male
organ is chosen as the object. If the superego rule does not prohibit the action
with the given actor and objects, the commitment phase begins. Otherwise, the
action is transformed as follows: If the object processor violates the superego
rule, an acceptable object processor is substituted. If the type of action violates
the rule, a new action type is substituted depending on the value of the ANX

9.2.

RELATED

WORK IN NIGHT DREAMING

229

associated with the abstract wish: If ANX is large, the action of fleeing is
selected; if ANX is small, an action of sitting, walking, or waiting is selected.
The objects of the original action become actors in the new action along with the
original actor. In the case of the “Manure Wagon Dream,” the original action
is prohibited by a rule stemming from the patient’s mother, ANX is large, and
so the action is transformed into fleeing with his brother.
Next, a setting for the action is chosen according to desired attributes common to all the abstract wishes, and the constraint that the action must be able
to be performed in that setting. In the example dream, a wheat field is chosen
as the setting because one may flee in a wheat field, and a wheat field is nourishing. At this point, the first dream situation has been generated. A dynamic

emotion variable called DMA

(for “dream manifest anxiety”) is set depending

on various conditions. If DMA is low, the commitment phase begins.
Otherwise, as is the case in the “Manure Wagon Dream” the following oper-

ations are performed: The transformed action is output (in the above dream as

SUB [I] WITH [brother] PI [runaway] IN/ON/AT [wheat field]). An emotion
(whose level corresponds to that of the DMA) is output (in the above dream
as AFF-STATE [great fear]). A special dream operation called “omitting a segment” is performed (and output in the above dream as SUB [I] ACT [trying to
hide]). Appropriate objects for the action of the next abstract wish are selected,
and those objects are introduced into the dream by “seeing.” Thus in the “Manure Wagon Dream,” mush and a manure wagon are selected as appropriate

objects for the drinking action of the following wish, so SUB (I) PI (see) OBJ
(manure wagon) OB (PROD mush) is output. The next iteration of the loop is
then performed (commitment phase is skipped in this case).
In the next iteration of the loop in the example dream, the action of the
abstract wish is to drink. The dreamer is selected as the actor of the action
(since NEGEM is small). The manure wagon and the mush have previously been
chosen as objects of the action of drinking. Since no superego rule is associated
with drinking, the program enters commitment phase. The commitment phase
consists of performing an “approach” if it has not already been performed,
producing the action as the next dream event, and performing the next iteration
of the loop. In the above dream, the approach is first output as SUB (I) OBJ

(manure wagon) PI (approach) and then the drinking action is output as SUB
(I) PI (drink) OBJ (mush).
Although Moser et al. (1980) consider the transformation of abstract wishes
to be a form of problem solving, the program contains no general-purpose plan-

ning and control mechanism

(as in DAYDREAMER).

Instead, the program is

written directly in Lisp, according to a flowchart which appears to be specifically tailored to the two dreams which the program generates—in fact, the
flowchart does not even achieve an economical generalization of the two dreams
since each dream requires a separate branch! Because the control structure is so
specialized, it is doubtful that it would be suitable for the generation of other
dreams. Furthermore, the mechanisms invoked within the flowchart (such as to

230 CHAPTER

9. REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

ON DAYDREAMING

find appropriate settings, actors, objects, or transformations of actors, objects,
and actions) are largely specific to the two dreams.
Like DAYDREAMER, the program incorporates emotions.
However, the
behavior of
dreaming
on
influence
and
model of the initiation, modification,
values prostatic
are
ANX
and
NEGEM
Both
emotions, remains undeveloped:
vided with input abstract wishes; their influence is limited to the selection of
actions or actors of actions in an often arbitrary way. While DMA is a dynamic
value, it merely invokes a particular sequence tailored to the “Manure Wagon
Dream.”
Although the dream simulation program of Moser et al. is not of the same
scope and level of generality as DAYDREAMER, it was an interesting and worthwhile experiment.

9.2.4

Hypnagogic Dreams

The dreaming which occurs just before falling asleep is called hypnagogic dreaming (Maury, 1878; S. Freud, 1900/1965; Silberer, 1909/1951; McKellar, 1957;

Foulkes, 1966). According to Foulkes (1966), sleep onset is defined as an alpha
EEG (electroencephalogram or brain waves) and slow eye movements, or theta
EEG with no eye movements (descending stage 1 sleep). This form of dreaming typically involves nonsensical concepts and bizarre visual or other imagery.
There is also a related hypnopompic state which occurs during the return to
wakefulness (Foulkes, 1966; McKellar, 1957).
Silberer (1909/1951) investigated a kind of hypnagogic dream—which he
calls the “autosymbolic phenomenon” —occurring both while in a drowsy state
and making an effort to think about something. This phenomenon involves the
transformation of feelings or abstract thought contents into symbolic images
(usually visual images). Silberer classifies autosymbolic phenomena into three
classes: “material,” “functional,” and “somatic” phenomena.
Material phenomena are autosymbolic experiences involving the transformation of thought
contents into images: When thinking about rewriting part of an essay, Silberer
saw himself planing a piece of wood. Functional phenomena involve the transformation of thoughts about the effectiveness or functioning of a thought process
(i.e., “meta” thoughts) into images: After having lost his train of thought and
thinking about this fact, he visualized a portion of typeset text with the last
few lines missing. Somatic phenomena involve the transformation of external
or internal bodily sensations into images: After taking a deep breath, he saw
himself and another person lifting a table up high.
It turns out that bizarre thoughts such as those found in hypnagogic dreams
occur in waking thought as well: Foulkes and Fleisher (1975) conducted a study
in which subjects were interrupted while in a state of relaxed wakefulness. In
25 percent of the interruptions, the reported thoughts were judged to be “regressive.” Klinger (1978) reports that 22 percent of the subjects sampling their

9.2,

RELATED

WORK IN NIGHT DREAMING

231

thoughts out of the lab (n = 285) described their thoughts as strange or distorted.

9.2.5

Lucid Dreams

Lucid dreams (C. E. Green, 1968; Garfield, 1974; LaBerge, 1985) are those night
dreams in which one is aware that one is dreaming and is able consciously to
manipulate the content of the dream, as if one were awake, to varying degrees
and for varying lengths of time. When one says to oneself “this is only a dream”
while dreaming or forces oneself to awaken out of a nightmare, one has experienced a rudimentary lucid dream. While full-blown lucid dreams are rare for
most persons, there are several techniques for increasing the frequency of this

form of dreaming (Gackenbach, 1985).
In some ways, lucid dreaming resembles daydreaming—the lucid dreamer,
like the daydreamer, is able to control the events of the dream or daydream to
some degree and is aware that the events of the dream or daydream are not real.
In other ways, the two forms of dreaming are quite different: While daydreaming
consists of a stream of thought accompanied by vague imagery, lucid dreaming
involves such extremely vivid and realistic imagery that it would more accurately
be called a stream of experience!
A computer model of lucid dreaming might incorporate the following elements:

1. a mechanism for the production of conventional night dreams (a “dream

generator” )
2. a process for generating a sequence of thoughts which enables one to recognize that one is dreaming and thus to initiate voluntary thought
3. a voluntary thought process which attempts, not always successfully, to
guide the operation of the dream generator according to various goals and
previously formed intentions to carry out certain activities (as is encour-

aged by some techniques for lucid dreaming [LaBerge, 1985])
4. a process whereby voluntary thought is terminated or waking up occurs

Of course, such a model must take a stand on what “voluntary thought” is, in
computational terms. This issue has been largely ignored in the present work
for simplicity.

i" ie uy

en

ie

a

P

= ae

fs my

asia) arebarge syenctay c a
’

tyeottiv,

i=

ely

Sia anata eae

fy coo Lips reagent
peas

ation

1 set ial

itopest-

Math

ri. ;

ire<i dpliesSee Mati ‘iiMA
ie
4
wm wry |
SE ED iLw
‘hew iesa vel Noman od >i
2

iy
Pe dpsinnaysYe
i any wa

2

eh

iar
Rae

ht Sa, PCA

vitbehay

ia

int

—"
;

pe
rd

tii

gy

iT AREY, psy eeean!
roe

Si oni SH ft tyhiab vet un enipicd

ss

-

ae Re

Wee

Aen
Alf pial

nits b
| dual —

“aaa

Soest

edya

minty wie. ca-woldinse 5 aTeernte betiagt an

petseon ahi eyes ol) (Nawan olde ot phe

Boae
Neopet 2 tar oe) Wy ahias mtd, drut ALG

hin ;

ygahe Hisar

yiie

vila bi: nn utes uh

VOnlieto

9

Dgeechheplares 4 iE
ean

“ERG Tre , lise rir
ain Daitiee! BAS:

Ahoonginuat

Hid Sy: i al

herr

yerr x

lee de ta

b

* Cake

s

j

(callers

me

: baieadeie

aque

URSIN

.)

é

ok

Me

a

>

vil

ahh

1

iL

OTA)
A

he

”

+

ex

Und.

alti

b|

ak

it

TBR Prnial

»

ie

et

i)

Hh
+

fut

ele
aT

aol'

i

2D
ny

i

er

ry otage i

isl

ae a

ee
co

as

a2 Batspier.

-

7

‘20 a

a Pai
aS per
all
Gripen
oa OF Tet saps
Plante

as

jade

We

i

te

pa

fe

wright

were

es

Lej
eal ey

utd ia wits

sina:

ily iis
enue

i

wit Alaie) yp

Ea, tearet i a parrerprtsears yt: +
nigh =

hk ;

ee

digth

ie

wire

Loy

‘

We tae
i)

26s

at

i%

¥

Orit Vial

R

ofp Ming Fo

war

Ty
7

oe

hind On ubSiaty ~é

sist

‘

ae

ys

ied

Ppa,

Te

‘|

einen

"plein

.
ta

Leontine

»

tlabsp » deny nde ‘lect

Wel’)

aay a eg

jet Ba
Siiracro
=
wets Nis "iit.
Pri don
—

edie,

Pepi

l

Ris i. 6

atHany

hereSond sm

39) s Asean findory LNMy he Setcctale

iter benifit.rd id brat

eases

tay se

ot, Piao eden

et

:

I

Pa

ge?

batt

a

tH

4

v0

Ret

she

—

Aaa ;

are

Oeics

Diy

a

GB)

ab

~) LAL

thbvggniy
‘iul@s

Py *¢

"0 inchiys

Ny

petiaceea

wey ay
:

x 3

iam ied | = ielaa ©

tes Tee ‘ae
ee
iG

del

:

;

BAF

ne.

|

Chapter 10

Underpinnings of a
Daydreaming Theory
This chapter addresses the philosophical, scientific, and methodological issues
involved in the construction of a computational theory of daydreaming. First,
we examine the philosophical justifications and implications of our underlying
assumption that daydreaming can, at least in principle, be captured in computational terms. We address the apparent paradox in constructing an objective
computer program to capture a subjective phenomenon such as the stream of
consciousness. Second, we address the problem of semantics in computer programs. We examine the sense in which a computer made out of electronic components can be said to exhibit the same cognitive processes or mental states as
a human. Third, we address the scientific issues involved in our theory: (a) the
objectives—in particular, the explanatory goals—of the theory, (b) the methodology employed in constructing the theory, and (c) the testing and evaluation
of the theory.

10.1

Philosophical Underpinnings

What is the true nature of the human mind? How is the mind (that is, the
notion of an entity which thinks and is conscious) related to the brain (that
is, the physical organ)? What, in reality, are mental entities such as thoughts,
sensations, emotions, desires, and beliefs? How do such mental entities relate
to the physical world? What do we mean by a computational theory of an
inherently subjective phenomenon such as the stream of consciousness? These
questions are aspects of what is known in philosophy as the mind-body problem.

233

234.

CHAPTER

10.1.1

10.

UNDERPINNINGS

OF A DAYDREAMING

Functionalist Approach to Mind-Body

THEORY

Problem

Theories which address the mind-body problem may be divided into two
classes:! dualist theories and materialist theories. Dualist theories maintain
that the mind is a nonphysical entity—that intelligence cannot be explained in

physical terms alone. That is, part (or all) of intelligence is provided by something outside of the physical realm. Materialist theories maintain that the mind
can be explained in purely physical terms—that mental states and processes
correspond in some way, however complex, to the states and operations of the
brain.
In the dualistic theory of René Descartes (Russell, 1945, p. 561), the mind

(or soul) exerts an influence on the body and this influence is located in the
pineal gland (a pinecone-shaped body attached to the base of the brain thought
by Descartes to be unique to humans but later found to occur in all vertebrates
[Asimoy, 1963]). After the discovery by scientists of conservation of momentum,
which would rule out a nonphysical influence on the physical world, his disciple
Geulincx proposed (Russell, 1945, pp. 561-562) that the soul does not act on
the body; rather, the body operates in exact synchronism with the mind so that
it appears that there is an influence when in reality there is not. The problem
with this theory is that if the body behaves according to rigid, physical laws,
then the mind, operating simultaneously, would be characterizable in terms of
those same laws (and thus dualism is lost).
Dualistic theories, which place the mind in the nonphysical realm, contend
that a purely physical explanation (and therefore a scientific explanation) of the
mind is not possible. In seeking a scientific, objective (at least partial) explanation of the phenomenon of human daydreaming, we make the assumption that
such an explanation is possible. It is logically possible for this assumption to be
false—it may eventually turn out, as in the theory of Descartes, that the mind,
a nonphysical entity, is in fact able to influence the body in the physical world
(for example, via some as yet unknown form of energy exchange [Churchland,
1984, pp. 9-10]). Nonetheless, cognitive science and the neurosciences have already achieved a degree of explanatory success operating under the assumption
that an objective characterization of mind is indeed possible (see Churchland,
1984, pp. 18-21 for a more detailed version of this argument).
In a functionalist theory of mind—a special brand of materialist theory—the
essential nature of a mental state is how that mental state is causally related
to inputs (environmental stimuli), outputs (bodily responses), and other mental

states (Fodor, 1981; Dennett, 1978).

Mental states have a “life of their own”

independent of any particular physical realization. In principle, it does not
matter whether mental states with a given set of causal properties are realized
on a digital computer, in the brain, or in some alien biology. See, for example,
Hofstadter’s (Hofstadter & Dennett, 1981, p. 376) discussion of how human
1The taxonomy presented here is based on those provided by Churchland (1984) and Fodor
(1981).

10.1.

PHILOSOPHICAL

UNDERPINNINGS

235

mental processes might be simulated using a variety of media including toilet
paper.
In computer science terms, mental processes can be carried out on any device providing a suitable interpreter. An interpreter for a given programming
language L is a program P’, written in a language L’, which carries out the operations (including generation of output) specified by a program P written in L,
given P (and data) as input. Interpreters enable programs in a given language
to be run on computers with different hardware architectures and instruction
sets, provided that an interpreter for the language exists for the particular computer. Interpreters may be nested: An interpreter for one language may be run
by another interpreter, which in turn is run by another interpreter, and so on,
until eventually there is an interpreter which is able to execute on the computer
in question.
A computational theory of mind is a functionalist (and therefore materialist)
theory. Computational theories are not specified in terms of neurophysiological processes, but in terms of an abstract computing device called the Turing
machine (Turing, 1936).? Turing machines provide a hardware-independent language for describing mental processes in a functionalist theory of mind.* The
modern digital computer may be characterized as a Turing machine.* Rather
than specifying a computational theory directly in terms of a Turing machine,
the theory is usually programmed on a computer running a high-level language

such as Lisp (Winston & Horn, 1981).

10.1.2

Problems with Theories of Subjective Phenomena

The stream of consciousness is an internal phenomenon experienced subjectively,
from a particular point of view which is unique to an individual. How can there
be a computational, materialist theory of a subjective phenomenon such as the
2Some authors (for example, Johnson-Laird,

1983, pp.

9-10) define functionalist theories

as those which characterize mental processes in terms of effective procedures (or algorithms)
as distinguished from Turing machines. The Church-Turing thesis (which we adopt) states
that the intuitive notion of an effective procedure is equivalent to a Turing machine.
3The Turing machine provides a deterministic model of human behavior. In order to admit
indeterministic

quantum

mechanical

effects we would

have to add a true random

number

generator to our Turing machine. However, whether and how quantum effects at the subatomic
level might cascade to the level of human behavior presents a very difficult problem (Dennett,
1984, pp. 77, 135-136).
4The digital computer is theoretically equivalent to the finite-state automaton (with a very
large number of states) rather than the more powerful Turing machine with its infinite tape.
Nonetheless, most researchers view computation in terms of Turing machines for (at least) the
following reasons: First, the memory of modern computers is so large that for most purposes
they can be considered as Turing machines (Lewis & Papadimitriou, 1981, p. 362). Second,
the Turing machine is closer to the computer in its basic architecture than the finite-state
automaton: A finite-state automaton is a large state-transition network and has no memory
analogous

to the tape of a Turing machine

or the primary

and secondary

memories

of a

computer (consult Pylyshyn, 1984, pp. 69-74 for an elaboration of this point). However, see
Kugel (1986) for an interesting proposal that thinking may be more than computing.

236

CHAPTER

10.

UNDERPINNINGS

OF A DAYDREAMING

THEORY

stream of consciousness?
First of all, what do we mean when we say that the stream of consciousness is “experienced subjectively”? Everyone is familiar with the feeling of
consciousness: There seems to be an “I” at the center of everything which observes, experiences, and—to varying degrees—controls the events which make
up consciousness. As Dennett (Hofstadter & Dennett, 1981, p. 6) has noted,
we feel that the “I” is located roughly in back of our eyes and in between our
ears. The “I” perceives the world through the senses, feels various emotional
states, experiences the “I” feeling, thinks, imagines, decides to perform—and
then performs—various actions in the world, and so on. However, this “I” feeling is sometimes lost—in unconscious states, in certain dream states, in certain
daydreaming states (Watkins, 1976), or even when becoming very involved in a
movie or novel.
The subjective rate of consciousness is not always linear with real time.
There is the common observation that “time flies when you’re having fun.” On
the level of milliseconds, one is often surprised, upon looking at a wristwatch, by
how long the first click of the second hand seems to take (if one starts looking
at the watch at the very instant of a tick)—thereafter, the second hand resumes
its normal subjective rate.
We assume that other human beings have internal experiences similar to our
own—that others, for example, have the “I” feeling. Others describe their experiences to us, and we can imagine—with varying degrees of apparent success—
how it would feel to have those experiences. However, the exact subjective
experience of another person is inaccessible to us (just as others do not have
access to our subjective experiences). We will never know exactly how a particular experience felt to the other person. Even if someone describes a subjective
experience which seems to coincide with one of our own subjective experiences,
there is no guarantee that the experience is actually felt the same way. This
problem is demonstrated in the classic philosophical conundrum of color perception: How does one person know that another person sees the same color when
both look at a “red” object? It is possible that the second person subjectively
perceives what the first person would call “blue,” but calls it “red” because that
is the language convention which the second person has learned. Even if similar
physical events occur in the brains of two persons when viewing a red object,
this does not necessarily imply that the color is subjectively experienced in the
same way.
Nagel (1974) considers the problem of subjective experience in asking the
reader to ponder “what it is like to be a bat.”° Bats perceive the world in a
way entirely foreign to humans: Instead of normal vision or hearing, bats use
echolocation (bouncing high frequency sounds off of objects in the environment
to determine their distance, velocity, size, and shape—a kind of natural sonar).
How can a human ever hope to know what it is like to be a bat? You can try to
>The example of bat experience was used previously by Farrell (1950, pp. 183-184).

10.1.

PHILOSOPHICAL

UNDERPINNINGS

237

imagine being a mouselike animal with webbed wings who flies around at night
to capture and eat insects; you “see” objects only using sonar; this is completely
natural to you; and so forth. But to the degree that you are able to imagine
this, you would only know what it would feel like for you to behave as a bat,
not what it feels like to the bat to be a bat. The question of knowing what
it is subjectively like to be another creature presents a difficult philosophical
problem, since in order to know what it is like to be that creature, you would
have to be that creature, in which case you would no longer be yourself, and
hence it would no longer be you knowing what it is like to be that creature.

Narayanan (1983) asks “What is it like to be a machine?”

in the context

of an example involving a nuclear reactor controller which hypothesizes and
prepares for potential future events—an instance of daydreaming. Narayanan
proposes that it is necessary for one to take the subjective “viewpoint” of such
a program in order to understand its operation.
The common, intuitive notion of subjective experience is difficult if not impossible to define in objective terms.® We should not then expect a computational theory to account for subjective experience in this sense. If a computational theory were constructed which completely accounted for the behavioral
impact of consciousness (ignoring for the present discussion what constitutes a
“complete account”), it appears that the theory would be logically compatible
with the absence of this concept of subjective experience. Put another way, it
seems that a human or computer which had such subjective experiences would
behave identically to one which did not. This makes one wonder what the role
of these subjective experiences could possibly be.
If the stream of consciousness is defined in terms of subjective experience,
how can a computational theory be constructed to account fully for it—in all
its subjective glory? Since pinning down the common notion of subjective experience is an insoluble (for the present, at any rate) philosophical problem, we
must instead formulate a definition of the stream of consciousness which does
not make use of this notion. Our definition must employ an objective, external
frame of reference, rather than a subjective, internal one.
The stream of consciousness must therefore be defined operationally in terms
of the input-output behavior—verbal and otherwise—of an organism having

(the common

notion of) a stream of consciousness.

Since we have made the

materialist assumption that human behavior is capturable in computational
terms, the stream of consciousness, redefined as input-output behavior, is also
capturable in computational terms.
At this point, the reader may well wonder if we have rendered our definition
so unlike the intuitive conception of the stream of consciousness as to make it
useless and irrelevant to those interested in this private, internal phenomenon.
6QOn the face of it, a dualist theory would seem to be more likely to account for subjective
experience since in such a theory the “I” feeling could be located outside the physical world.
However, as argued above, dualist theories fail to provide a satisfactory scientific account
because such theories are not stated in objective terms.

238

CHAPTER

10.

UNDERPINNINGS

OF A DAYDREAMING

THEORY

But the purpose of this definition is merely to ensure that the phenomenon under investigation is in principle capturable by a computational theory. In fact,
such a theory—if complete—will have to account for a rich set of behavioral phenomena, including practically every aspect of the intuitive notion of the stream
of consciousness—that is, every aspect except this elusive notion of subjective
experience. Most, if not all, aspects of our common conception of the stream of
consciousness—the contents of the stream—will be accounted for by the theory,
since most such aspects have a causal effect on behavior. For example, when we
feel a negative emotional state, we tend to behave more negatively. When we
decide to perform an action in the future, we often do perform that action. We
are capable of producing rich, detailed descriptions of our internal experiences.
Our verbal behavior is thus influenced in a very complex way by what we refer to commonly as the stream of consciousness. Accounting for this behavior
is a sufficiently—in fact, extremely—difficult problem without also having to
explain the true nature of subjective experience (whatever that might be).
The mere fact that the content of internal experiences can be described to
others implies that those experiences are not epiphenomenal. If the experiences
were epiphenomenal, they would not have a causal effect on verbal behavior.
However, the subjective sensation of experience may indeed be epiphenomenal.
We do not deny the existence or reality of this sensation. From an internal point
of view, this sensation certainly seems to exist.

However,

we do assume

that

this subjective sensation has no causal effect on behavior. This is a reasonable
assumption as argued above, since its falsehood would seem to imply influence on
the brain from outside the objective, physical realm. If, possibly, the assumption
is false, a stumbling block will eventually be reached. However, we are a long
way from reaching such a stumbling block. In the meantime, we can investigate
what appears to be a large component of our intuitive notion of the stream
of consciousness which does have an effect on behavior. If we are eventually
able to construct a complete theory of the behavioral impact of the stream of
consciousness, which addresses all the important issues regarding our intuitive
notion of the stream of consciousness except for the subjective sensation, we
may decide that the question of subjective sensation is no longer an important
question for us.
Thus our theory of the stream of consciousness will attempt to account only
for its objective, empirically observable aspects. That does not mean that we
must ignore the many varied aspects of consciousness with which we are all
familiar, since these aspects are observable in the descriptions we receive from
people. DAYDREAMER is the computer program embodiment of a computational theory of the stream of consciousness as defined operationally in terms of
the impact of the intuitive notion of the stream of consciousness on behavior:
verbal and otherwise.
Why focus on the stream of consciousness? How do we know that the stream
of consciousness is a relevant object of study? Some psychologists (see, for
example, Nisbett & Wilson, 1977; Watson, 1924) have criticized the use of

10.2.

THE PROBLEM

OF SEMANTICS

239

introspective reports of consciousness (James, 1890a; Titchener, 1912) in inferring cognitive processes. Although the subjective aspect of consciousness may
have no causal effect of behavior, the contents of consciousness influences verbal behavior, and, furthermore, reflects the useful activities of creative problem
solving, learning from imagined experiences, and emotion regulation (as argued
in Chapter 1). In addition, Ericsson and Simon (1984, pp. 24-30, 48-61, 220)
present extensive arguments—which need not be repeated here—that verbal reports of the stream of consciousness are not epiphenomenal but highly relevant
to the study of cognitive processes and memory structures.
If our theory is to account for the effect of the intuitive notion of stream of
consciousness on behavior, our theory must include some construct, or architectural element, corresponding to the stream of consciousness. In fact, it does:
the current planning context discussed in Chapter 7 is such an element.

10.2

The

Problem

of Semantics

What is the nature of the meaning of concepts? How are concepts programmed
in a computer

program?

How

can

a data structure

in a computer

program

be said to represent a concept? What do we mean when we say a computer
program has semantics? What is semantics, anyway? How can we represent
the subjective aspects of consciousness in a computer program? How could a
mental state such as embarrassment be programmed into a computer?

10.2.1

Structure-Content

Distinctions

A distinction is often made between claims regarding the content of a system
and claims regarding the structure of the system. Newell (1982) distinguishes
between the “knowledge level” and the “symbol level” (and several other lower
levels). The knowledge level is a system which consists of a set of goals, actions,
and a body of knowledge. The behavior of the knowledge level is specified by the
“principle of rationality”: If the system has knowledge that an action will achieve
one of its goals, that action is selected. (Knowledge may thus be viewed as
whatever a system has that enables its behavior to be computed according to the
principle of rationality.) However, this principle does not specify which action
will actually be performed, for example, in the event that several actions are
selected or if multiple, conflicting goals are present in a given situation. Thus the
knowledge level provides only a partial specification of behavior. The remainder
of the specification is given by the symbol level, which provides mechanisms for
control, encoding of knowledge, memory storage and retrieval, and so on.

Pylyshyn (1984) distinguishes three levels: the “physical level” (or biological
level), the “symbol level,” and the “semantic level.” These correspond respectively to the device, symbol, and knowledge levels of Newell. Symbol level
generalizations are expressed in terms of the “functional architecture” of the

240

CHAPTER

10.

UNDERPINNINGS

OF 4 DAYDREAMING

THEORY

system: A “virtual machine” for cognitive processes providing a set of primitive operations. Pylyshyn proposes the criterion of “cognitive penetrability” for
determining whether a given function should be located within the symbol or
semantic levels: If a given function is alterable in a semantically regular way
through the use of mental representations such as goals and beliefs, then that
function is cognitively penetrable and should be located in the semantic level.

10.2.2

Semantics

of the Stream

of Consciousness

In order for DAYDREAMER to model the stream of consciousness, it must contain representations for the contents of the stream of consciousness. As we have
noted above, the stream of consciousness contains a variety of phenomenological
events. How can we represent events which are inherently subjective: valid only
from a single point of view?
Pekala and Levine (1981) have developed a methodology for assessing subjective experience. Subjects are asked to sit quietly with their eyes open for several minutes and then complete a 60-item questionnaire. Items are drawn from
the following aspects of consciousness: body integrity, time, state of awareness,
attention, volition, self-awareness, perception, positive affect, negative affect,
imagery, internal dialogue, rationality, memory, meaning, and alertness. The
subject rates each item along a 7-point scale, where extremes are provided by
statements such as “I experienced no strong feelings of anger” and “I experi-

enced very strong feelings of anger” (p. 43). The questionnaire thus provides
one representation for the phenomenology of consciousness. However, this representation is too broad for our purposes since it provides too low a level of
detail (e.g., why is the subject angry, and at whom?), and does not measure
the instantaneous change of consciousness over time (e.g., was the subject angry
during the entire period, or merely for an instant?).
Although stream of consciousness events are subjective, it is possible to
make generalizations about them. It is reasonable to expect that human beings
have similar subjective experiences. Such a set of generalizations is provided by
human language. Through use of such generalizations it is possible to describe
subjective experiences to others. Another possibility is to provide a “key” which
maps the program’s representations to descriptions of what subjective experiences they involve: The key could state, for example, that a particular representational structure corresponds to the feeling of embarrassment in humans.
This is in effect what the English generator of DAYDREAMER accomplishes.
One might argue that this is begging the question—we have substituted one
ill-defined description language for another. This problem of absolute meaning
is not unique to the phenomenology problem, however. An identical problem occurs for any meaning representation scheme. No matter what syntax is used to
implement a representation—whether it be node and links, strings over a finite
alphabet, or positive integers—the meaning of that representation is completely
dependent upon what interpretation is placed on the syntax. That is, syntac-

10.2.

THE PROBLEM OF SEMANTICS

241

tically identical structures may be used to represent different concepts, just as
syntactically different structures may be used to represent identical concepts. If
we attempt to formalize the interpretation process, we are forced to invent yet
another representation which itself is subject to interpretation. Thus we can
never have an absolute representation whose meaning is specified objectively.

In denotational semantics (Stoy, 1977), for example, the meaning of a computer
program in one language is specified in terms of another language—a metalanguage. The meaning, however, of the metalanguage is left unspecified. Usually
the metalanguage consists of abstract mathematical concepts whose meaning is
assumed to be well understood.
That the same problem arises for both phenomenological and conceptual
representations hints at the possibility that they are really instances of the
same problem. In the case of music, L. B. Meyer (1956) argues that “there
is no diametric opposition, no inseparable gulf, between the affective and the
intellectual responses made to music” (p. 39).

10.2.3.

The Functionalist Approach to Semantics

If representations can have no inherent, absolute meaning, then just how do
they acquire meaning? In functionalist theories, representational entities exist at the semantic level (Newell, 1982; Pylyshyn, 1984), and correspond (at
least to a first approximation) to various concepts from folk psychology such
as beliefs, goals, emotions, and so on. A functionalist theory of mind specifies
how these representational entities causally relate to input, output, and other
representational entities.
Thus a representational entity alone does not have semantics. Rather, a
representational data structure acquires meaning only in conjunction with processes that operate on that representation and which have a causal relation
with external objects, events, or concepts of other intelligent entities, such as
humans. So, for example, in the knowledge level of Newell, goals, actions, and
other knowledge elements have meaning only in combination with the “principle
of rationality,” which relates the knowledge elements to processes carried out in
the external world.

10.2.4

The Elusiveness of Concepts

Finding suitable representations for concepts, however, is a very difficult task.
Concepts have an elusive, open-ended quality which makes complete and consistent characterization difficult. For any representation of a concept, a counterexample may be found which demonstrates the incompleteness or inconsistency of
that concept.
First, there is representational incompleteness. Suppose, for example, we
wish to represent the concept of buying something. We might define buying
as two instances of the ATRANS primitive in conceptual dependency (Schank,

242

CHAPTER

10.

UNDERPINNINGS

OF

A DAYDREAMING

THEORY

1975), which refers to abstract transfer of possession of an object from one
person to another. Buying thus defined consists of an ATRANS of money from
the buyer to the seller and an ATRANS of the object being sold from the seller
to the buyer. But this definition is obviously incomplete. What if a credit card
of the credit card from
is used for payment? In this case, there is an ATRANS
the buyer to the seller, an ATRANS of the card back to the buyer, an ATRANS
of a pen from the seller to the buyer, an ATRANS of the charge sheet, a signing
of the charge sheet, an ATRANS back of the charge sheet and pen, and so on.
Then there is an ATRANS of the charge sheet from the seller to a third party,
the credit card company. Then there is an ATRANS of a bill from the credit
card company to the buyer, followed by an ATRANS of a check from the buyer
to the credit card company, and so on. What if the transaction takes place by
mail order? What if the sold item is delivered to the seller’s home by another
party? But these are mere details—in each of the above cases, money and the
sold object are transferred in some way, and these facts are captured by the
definition.
However, a more serious form of incompleteness may arise. Suppose a buyer
purchases an item by check from a mail order company. Two months later, the
buyer receives the cancelled check, but the item still has not arrived. At this
point, the seller is obligated to deliver the item or to refund the buyer’s money.
We see now that the original definition of buying is but a component of a larger
picture involving higher-level notions of oblzgation and implicit contracts. Note,
however, that a mere ATRANS of money to someone does not automatically
invoke such obligations—if the ATRANS were accidental, such as if money were
found on the ground, there is no obligation to return the money to its original

owner (this is the case of “finder’s keepers losers weepers.”)
Incompleteness of representations may continue indefinitely if one tries hard
enough. Of course, this phenomenon is paralleled in humans who always continue to learn more about concepts. Schank (1986, pp. 1-24) argues that understanding of concepts may be characterized along a spectrum from “making
sense” at one end, to “cognitive understanding” in the middle, to “complete
empathy” at the other end (the domain of present work in artificial intelligence
being between “making sense” and “cognitive understanding” on this scale [p.

9]). Crook (1983) contends that attribution of consciousness to another requires
empathy, analogical sympathy, and concordance.
Another problem is that of representational conflict. In this situation, two
representations or rules are postulated which appear correct when considered in
isolation from each other. However, when those representations are incorporated
into a system, it is noticed that the two representations contradict each other in
a certain situation. For example, suppose there is one rule which states that “if
a person is friends with another person, the former person.will help the latter
person,” and another rule which states that “if a person is angry at another
person, the former person will not help the latter person.” These two rules
conflict when a person is angry at a friend. In order to cope with a problem

10.2. THE PROBLEM OF SEMANTICS

_

243

such as this, one may order the rules so that one rule has priority over another,
introduce further rules to resolve conflicts, modify the conditions of the rules
(e.g., “if a person is friends with and not angry at another person sh) 08
otherwise rethink and reorganize the representations.
Naturally occurring concepts are very rich entities. Computer programs will
not display intelligence approaching that of humans unless they contain a collection of multifarious concepts. The importance of this has been recognized by researchers in narrative comprehension engaged in the construction of “in-depth”
representational schemes (Dyer, 1983a). Representations derived initially from
folk psychological concepts will have to be enriched. Our view is that if sufficiently complex representational systems are built, and augmented through the
incorporation of both real and daydreamed experiences, the concepts contained
in that system will exhibit the same elusive, vague character.

10.2.5

Connectionist

Approaches to Semantics

The elusive quality of concepts has led some researchers toward a holistic approach to representation known as connectionism (Rumelhart et al., 1986; Hofstadter, 1983; J. A. Feldman & Ballard, 1982; Hinton & J. A. Anderson, 1981;
Grossberg, 1976; Rosenblatt, 1962). In this approach, specific nodes in a representation do not refer to particular entities of the knowledge level. Rather,
semantics is distributed among the nodes of the system in a “holographic” manner. It is argued (McClelland, Rumelhart, & Hinton, p. 12) that various proposed knowledge structures—such as scripts, frames, and schemata—are in fact
approximate descriptions of the “emergent” (Dennett, 1978, p. 107; Neisser,
1963, p. 194) properties of an appropriate connectionist network.
The holistic connectionist approach is characterized by the assumption that
high-level conceptual representations can be generated automatically starting

from low-level (or even random {[Rumelhart & Zipser, 1986]) initial representations. Thus researchers who work in this paradigm are typically not very
interested in the explicit construction of higher-level knowledge structures. Not
_ all connectionist models are holistic (see, for example, Waltz & Pollack, 1985;
Rumelhart & Norman, 1982). However, our emphasis in this section is on
holistic connectionism, since it provides an alternative to knowledge-level representations.
A connectionist system consists of a set of nodes connected by directional
links (Rumelhart, Hinton, & McClelland, 1986). These links are of two types—
excitatory and inhibitory. Each node has an activation level and each link has
a strength. Activation spreads from a node to connected nodes. The amount
of activation which is spread depends on the strength of the link from one node
to the other. Positive activation is spread if the link is excitatory; negative
activation is spread if the link is inhibitory. Short-term information is stored
in the activation levels of nodes, while long-term information is stored in link
strengths. Thus a connectionist system must learn through the alteration of the

244

CHAPTER

10.

UNDERPINNINGS

OF

A DAYDREAMING

THEORY

strengths of connections between nodes. Some nodes, called input and output
nodes, communicate with an external environment. The remaining nodes are
called hidden nodes. In 1890, William James, inspired by physiological research
of his day, outlined a similar connectionist model. This model incorporated a
learning rule for modification of link strengths, and the ideas of inhibition and

spread of activation (James, 1890a, p. 567).
Representation in a connectionist model may be local, distributed, or a combination of the two. In a local representation scheme, single nodes represent
single concepts. In a distributed scheme, each concept is spread across many
nodes and furthermore each node represents many concepts. In distributed representations “it is impossible to point to a particular place where the memory
for a particular item is stored” (Hinton et al., 1986, p. 80). Emergent, holistic
properties are possible in both local and distributed representational schemes.
It is often difficult to distinguish clearly between distributed and local representations in a holistic connectionist system (Hinton et al., 1986, p. 85).
Connectionist models take their inspiration from the physiology of the brain,
which is estimated (in humans) to contain tens of billions of neurons. Like the
nodes and links of connectionist models, neurons (nodes) have dendrites (links
to a node) and an axon (the link from a node) connected by excitatory and
inhibitory synapses. Neurons are quite slow (on the order of milliseconds) compared to the electronic circuits of computers (on the order of nanoseconds).
J. A. Feldman and Ballard (1982) have therefore proposed the “100-step program” constraint—for those tasks which take about a second, a program should
require only about that many steps of a parallel system. Connectionist models
are materialist theories of cognition which can, in fact, be simulated by a Turing
machine, albeit at a very slow rate.
Researchers differ in their view of the correspondence between connectionist nodes and neurons. As Smolensky (1986b) points out, there are several
possibilities: Connectionist models can be given either local or distributed neural interpretations, and either local or distributed conceptual interpretations.
These mappings are independent. In a local neural interpretation of a model,
for example, each node corresponds to a neuron. It is possible for such a model
to have a local conceptual interpretation (in which each node and neuron represents a single concept) or a distributed conceptual interpretation (in which
concepts are represented by a set of nodes or neurons). In a distributed neural
interpretation of a model, each node corresponds to a set of neurons. If such a
model has a local conceptual interpretation, each node represents one concept
which is in turn represented by many neurons. If the model has a distributed
conceptual interpretation, concepts are represented by a set of nodes, each of
which is represented by a set of neurons.
Some of the tasks which connectionist models are able to perform are as
follows (Rumelhart & Zipser, 1986, p. 161):

e Auto association. The model is trained with a set of concepts. Given part

10.2.

THE PROBLEM

OF SEMANTICS

245

of a concept, the system will then retrieve the remainder of that concept.
e Pattern association. The model is trained to associate concepts.
one concept the system will retrieve the associated concept.

Given

e Classification. The model is trained with a set of concepts and classifications for those concepts. Given a concept similar to those already seen,
the system will return the best classification for that concept.
e Regularity detection. The model discovers salient features or central tendencies in a collection of given concepts.
In each case above, the system is first trained. Later, tasks are accomplished by activating appropriate input-output nodes, waiting for the network
to reach a stable pattern of activity, and then reading the results from the remaining input-output nodes. Most applications of connectionist networks may
be viewed as instances of one or more of the above cases. For example, the
storage and retrieval of information in human memory is modeled as a form of

auto association (McClelland & Rumelhart, 1986).”
In another application of connectionist models, schema acquisition is modeled as regularity detection (Rumelhart, Smolensky, McClelland, & Hinton,
1986, pp. 22-38). Although the system exhibits what might be called schemata
or prototypes for rooms in a house (kitchen, living room, bathroom, and so
on),® it should be noted that these schemata are not as conceptually rich as,

say, restaurant scripts (Schank & Abelson, 1977).
One difficult problem with holistic connectionist representations is as follows: Since concepts are represented as a stable pattern of activation of the
nodes in the network, only one concept can be represented at a time (Rumelhart et al., 1986, p. 38). That is, one cannot have multiple copies of a concept.
Therefore, it is difficult to represent even simple relationships among multiple
concepts (Hinton et al., 1986, pp. 82-84, 105). One solution is to have a separate copy of the network for each concept, and “gateway” networks for relating
those concepts (Hinton, 1981). First, this seems a bit costly to someone who
- is used to creating a new concept by allocating a few bytes of storage. Second,
and more importantly, if this approach is adopted, many of the advantages originally claimed for connectionist models are lost: instead of semantic relationships
emerging from the “microstructure” of the system, the semantic relationships
7See Chapter 8 for a critical discussion of the memory model of McClelland and Rumelhart
i
(1986).
8Tarnopolsky (1986) independently chose a similar example involving objects in a living
room and bedroom for his simple connectionist model of “spontaneous thinking.” Currently,
his model is able to produce thought streams such as:
There are THINGs like the PICTURE which are SMALL. The THING which
is SMALL may be a PICTURE. The THINGs such as a CURTAIN and a PIC-

TURE are in the LIVING ROOM.

(p. 18)

246

CHAPTER

10.

UNDERPINNINGS

OF A DAYDREAMING

THEORY

are determined by the “macrostructure” of the system of modules as designed
by the programmer. One might think that a “scrambling” function could be
run on the result in order to gain back the potential emergent properties lost in
the modularization process. However, emergent properties occur in both local
(modularized) and distributed holistic connectionism schemes, so it may not
be necessary to rescramble the result. Furthermore, the fact remains that the
programmer is forced to make semantic-level design decisions.
It would be difficult to construct a theory of daydreaming in the holistic, connectionist paradigm as currently conceived, for several reasons: First, knowledge
structures such as schemata are important in the generation of daydreaming behavior; although connectionist models have recently been able to achieve certain
aspects of schemata in an emergent fashion, it is difficult then to employ those
schemata in an interesting way. Second, even operations which are staples in
artificial intelligence programs, such as instantiation, become a major obstacle
in a connectionist scheme. Most generally, we do not see why we should limit
ourselves to what a given low-level mechanism may happen (or not happen) to
be able to do.
It seems to be difficult to implement instantiation without abandoning the
holistic paradigm. Touretzky (1986) has developed an implementation of Lisp
cons cell allocation in connectionist networks; such a mechanism could be used
to implement instantiation. However, it must be stressed that this is classical

instantiation, which requires that the programmer specify the representation of
concepts in advance. Thus the system cannot discover its own concepts as in the
holistic paradigm. At present, the only advantages of redeveloping traditional
artificial intelligence tools for connectionist networks are the “blurring” and
fault tolerance properties provided by those networks. If a holistic, connectionist network could be made to discover its own instantiations and relationships
among concepts, that would be interesting indeed.
We do not deny the importance of emergent phenomena. It is our hope,
for example, that the elusive property of concepts will arise once a sufficiently
complex knowledge level has been constructed. However, any approach that
seeks to achieve intelligence through emergent phenomena must give careful
consideration to the following problem: If intelligent behavior is finally produced
by the model, will we be satisfied that we understand how that behavior is
achieved? Will the model serve as an explanation of the phenomenon? Will
the explanation be at a level which is of use to us? Will we be able to explain
or predict phenomena of interest? For example, will the model be useful in
diagnosing and treating depression?
Of course, in any artificial intelligence endeavor, lack of understanding of
the behavior of a running program is a potential source of difficulties. Simply
because one can “name” nodes does not mean one understands the operation of
the system (McDermott, 1976; Hinton et al., 1986, p. 85)—the semantics of any
computer program resides, not in any single node or data structure, but rather
in the processes which operate on those data structures, and how a subset of

10.3.

SCIENTIFIC UNDERPINNINGS

247

those data structures are eventually related to the external world.
Although holistic connectionism presents several difficult problems, it may
in fact be fruitful to investigate semantic connectionist models—those in which
knowledge-level information is communicated between active processing elements in parallel (Charniak, 1983a; Small & Rieger, 1982; Minsky, 1977, 1981;
Hewitt, 1977) or in which knowledge-level information is represented by nodes
and links where processing is carried out by other mechanisms (J. R. Anderson,
1983). A knowledge-level connectionist theory of daydreaming is beyond the
scope of the present work; however we do consider it an interesting topic for

future research.®

10.3

Scientific Underpinnings

What are the scientific objectives of our research? Why do we want to understand how the mind works? According to what methodology will the construction of the theory proceed? How do we go about constructing the theory? How
do we test and evaluate the theory? This section addresses these issues.

10.3.1

Scientific Objectives and Methodology

In constructing a computational theory of daydreaming there are two primary
objectives: an understanding of human daydreaming—a scientific objective—
and the application of daydreaming in order to make computer systems more
useful—an engineering objective. In this section, we consider the scientific objectives of the present research (applications are discussed in Chapter 11): What
constitutes an understanding of a phenomenon? What constitutes a successful
theory?
Our theory must satisfy the following requirements: First, it must be stated
in physical terms—that is, as a computer program. This ensures that no hidden
or unknown operations are required in order to apply the theory. Second, the
theory must be stated at a useful level of abstraction. That is, the theory should
' provide generalizations which are useful in making predictions (Pylyshyn, 1984,

eh? ‘T):
We explore how a theory may satisfy these requirements, and how understanding of a phenomenon benefits from imposing these requirements on the
theory, in the context of a detailed example—that of an electronic telephone
switching system.
The electronic switching system is contained in a sealed box which is plugged
into a power outlet and connected by wires to four telephones. Most everyone
is familiar with the operation of the telephone. After a bit of thought, one
may propose an initial concrete theory of the telephone switching system. For
simplicity, we will not actually describe the theory as a computer program;
2We outline a preliminary version of such a theory in Chapter 11.

248

CHAPTER 10.

UNDERPINNINGS

OF

A DAYDREAMING

THEORY

however, a demon-based implementation (Dyer, 1983a) is possible directly from
our English description.
The theory is as follows: First of all, the system has an internal representation of the time-varying physical state of each of its phones, including the
current hook state (on-hook or off-hook), current phone number being dialed,
and instantaneous air pressure level (i.e., sound) at the phone’s transmitter.
The system can also influence the physical state of each of its phones in the
following ways: It can make the phone ring, and it can modify the air pressure
level over time at the phone’s receiver.
A bit of terminology will simplify the description of the remainder of the
theory: When the system begins the continual ringing of a phone, we will say
that the system starts ringing the phone. While this process is being performed
we will say the phone is ringing. When this process terminates we will say
that the system stops ringing the phone. When the system begins the continual
modification of the instantaneous air pressure level of the receiver of a phone
to produce the sound of a particular tone, such as a dial tone or audible ring
tone, we will say that the system gives the phone that tone. While this process
is being performed we will say that the phone has the tone. When this process
terminates we will say that the system removes the tone. When the system
begins the continual modification of the instantaneous air pressure level of the
receiver of one phone in proportion to the sensed instantaneous air pressure
level of the transmitter of another phone, and vice versa, we will say that the
system connects those two phones. While this process is being performed we
will say the the two phones are connected. When this process terminates we will
say that the system disconnects the two phones.
A few constraints which the system obeys are as follows: A phone may only
have one tone at a time. A phone may be connected to at most one other phone.
A phone may be in, at most, one of the following conditions at any given time:
It may have a tone, be connected to another phone, or be ringing.
The processes which the telephone switching system performs may then be

described as follows:1°
e When the hook state of a phone changes from on-hook to off-hook, the
system gives that phone a dial tone.
e When a phone number is dialed by a phone that has a dial tone, the
system removes the dial tone from this calling phone, gives the phone an
audible ring tone, and starts ringing the phone corresponding to the dialed
number—the called phone. The system notes the calling phone associated
with the called phone.
10Tt is assumed that the multiple actions necessary to handle a given phone state change
are carried out as an atomic (uninterruptable) action. That is, the system finishes handling
one state change before it handles the next.

10.3.

SCIENTIFIC UNDERPINNINGS

249

e When a phone is ringing and the hook state of that called phone changes
from on-hook to off-hook, the system stops ringing the phone, removes
the audible ring tone from the associated calling phone, and connects the
calling and called phones.
e When two phones are connected and the hook state of one of the phones
changes from off-hook to on-hook, the system disconnects the two phones.

One reason for stating a theory as a computer program is to ensure the
concreteness of the theory. Constructing a program forces the theory designer
to consider cases that might have otherwise been overlooked. Another reason
is to facilitate testing of the theory. By executing the programmed theory on a
computer, one can easily try out various example situations in order to:

e Find bugs in the program/theory. Cases which were not considered when
constructing the program/theory are likely to be exposed by running the
program. Incomplete and inconsistent aspects of the program/theory are

discovered when the program bombs.!! These problems may then be fixed.
e Discover differences in the behavior of the program/theory and the known
behavior of the actual system. This leads to appropriate revisions of the
theory /program.

e Suggest experiments to be carried out on the actual system. When a certain behavior is produced by the program in some situation, and the theory
designer does not know how the actual system behaves in that situation,
an experiment may be conducted in order to find out. If the prediction
of the theory holds in reality, confidence in the theory is strengthened.
Otherwise, the theory must be revised.

Our initial theory of the telephone switching system may have several faults:
It may be internally inconsistent or incomplete, and it may not correspond to
the actual behavior of the system. However, now that we have an explicit
theory, we can begin testing the theory. We consider various possible sequences
of hook states and dialed numbers. If problems are discovered, the theory will
be modified in order to fix those problems.
What if a number is dialed by a phone when that phone is connected to
another phone? What happens in the program? Nothing. This behavior is
consistent with the known behavior of the telephone switching system. What if
the hook state of the phone associated with a ringing phone changes from offhook to on-hook? That is, what if there is no answer and the caller hangs up?
The program does nothing. In this case, the behavior is inconsistent with the
11The branch of computer science sometimes known as verification is concerned with discovering such problems in a program automatically or semiautomatically. However, these
techniques are not yet able to cope with programs as intricate as most artificial intelligence
programs. See the criticisms of DeMillo, Lipton, and Perlis (1978) of this approach.

250

CHAPTER

10.

UNDERPINNINGS

OF

A DAYDREAMING

THEORY

known behavior of the telephone switching system. Therefore, the program must
be appropriately modified: In this situation, the system should stop ringing the
called phone and remove the audible ring tone from the calling phone. What
if a phone which has a dial tone goes on-hook before a number is dialed? The
program must be modified to disconnect the dial tone.
What if a dialed phone number corresponds to a phone that currently has a
tone, is connected to another phone, or is ringing? That is, what if the called
phone is busy? The program in this case will violate the constraint that a phone
may not be ringing and connected to a phone at the same time—the program
will bomb. Thus the program must be modified to check whether the called
phone is busy, and if so, to give the calling phone a busy signal (and to remove
the busy signal when the calling phone goes on-hook).
Once the above modification has been performed, a particular special case
of busy phones may be considered: What if a dialed phone number corresponds
to the very same phone that dialed that number? That is, what happens when
a phone calls itself? The theory predicts that the phone will be given a busy
signal. In this case, however, one may not know what the actual behavior of the
telephone switching system is. Consequently, an experiment must be carried
out on the actual system. If a busy signal is in fact given to the calling phone,
this prediction of the theory is shown to be correct. Otherwise, the theory must

be appropriately modified.}”
Another case involving busy signals might be considered: If the caller hangs
on the line after receiving a busy signal, will the system remove the busy signal,
give the caller an audible ring tone, and start ringing the called phone when the
called phone eventually becomes free? The theory predicts that this is not the
case—the busy signal will remain until the caller hangs up. This turns out to
be true when tried out on the actual system.
Other situations cause the program to bomb: When a ringing phone is picked
up, the system also gives that phone a dial tone, violating the constraint that
a phone may not have a tone and be connected to another phone at the same
tine. The program must be fixed to give a phone a dial tone only if it is not
ringing. What happens if an unassigned number is dialed? The program again
bombs in this case. The program must be fixed to give the calling phone a
recording.
Still other predictions of the theory may be found to be incorrect: For example, suppose when two phones are connected, one phone goes on-hook for an
instant and then goes off-hook again. The program would disconnect the two
phones, while most real telephone systems keep the phones connected.
Instead of simply asserting that the telephone switching system somehow lets
one “dial the number of a person and then talk to that person,” we constructed
12The behavior of actual phone systems varies: Some give a busy signal and some give a
recording. Still others, such as my old local exchange in Brentwood, California (a Western
Electric No. 1A Electronic Switching System), give a sequence of clicks; when one then hangs
up, the phone rings.

10.3.

SCIENTIFIC UNDERPINNINGS

251

an explicit, computational theory of the system. In the process, we discovered
many unanticipated complexities. We were forced to ask and answer questions
that we might have otherwise neglected. Although there are probably other
problems with our theory of the telephone switching system, it now comes quite
close to reality. The theory may be used to understand, explain, and predict
the operation of the system.
The theory presented above is a high-level theory (in terms of abstract states
and processes) of the telephone switching system. This theory was constructed
based on the external behavior of the system. Suppose, now, that we are allowed
to take apart the sealed box containing the switching system. Now we can
examine and catalog each and every electronic component and connection in
that system—we can produce a complete low-level description of the system in
terms of an electronic circuit diagram.
The high-level theory may be related to the low-level description via a certain
transformational sequence: If the circuit incorporates a traditional microprocessor and memory, the transformations are those of a compiler which converts the
high-level language program into a machine language program for the microprocessor. Otherwise, the transformations must convert the high-level language
program directly into a hard-wired circuit (see, for example, the proposal of

Mostow, 1983).
The two levels have their own advantages and disadvantages.
The lowlevel description is useful if we wish to construct another identical electronic
switching system. However, constructing a modified version of the system would
be extremely difficult, since one has only a low-level electronic description of
the circuit and not a more abstract understanding of the functional modules or
programs contained in the circuit (a more abstract understanding would in fact
be a high-level theory). In contrast, the high-level theory facilitates modification
of the system, provided that one has a way to implement that high-level theory.
A high-level theory also has the advantage that it can be implemented in any
medium for computation.
The high-level theory is more useful for explanation. Suppose we are given
the question, Why does a phone get a busy signal when the number of that same
phone is dialed? Our high-level theory provides the following answer: Whenever
one calls a number corresponding to a phone that is in use, one receives a busy
signal. It does not matter if that phone happens to be the same phone one
is calling from. The need for a busy signal derives from the constraint that a
phone may not be connected to two things at once. In constrast, the low-level
description (for a hard-wired logic circuit) would only give us an explanation
something like: “Phone 4 is given a busy signal when phone 4 is dialed because
when input lines 11 and 12 are both high, and pass through AND gate 62, the
resulting high value is ANDed with input line 4 by gate 112, producing a high
value which is sent to OR gate 19, resulting in a high value which is ANDed
by gate 442 with a high value from flip-flop 45, producing a high value which is
ANDed by gate 32 with a high value from AND gate 48 whose inputs are the

252

CHAPTER

10.

UNDERPINNINGS

OF A DAYDREAMING

THEORY

outputs of flip-flops 12 and 13, resulting in a high value which sets flip-flop 21,
whose high output is connected to driver 24, whose 12 volt output is in turn
attached to relay 24 that connects phone 4 to the busy tone generator.”
The high-level theory is also more useful for making predictions. For example, suppose one wishes to know what happens if two parties place a call to
each other at the same time. Our high-level theory states that a busy signal
is given to the caller whenever the called phone has a tone, is connected to
another phone, or is ringing. Since both parties have a dial tone while dialing
the other party, the answer is that both parties receive a busy signal. It is more
difficult to answer this question using the low-level description: One would have
to specify the appropriate time-varying input values (corresponding to the hook
state changes and dialed numbers of the two phones of interest), simulate the
operation of the circuit for those inputs, and then interpret the resulting output
levels (which determine what connections the system makes). The simulation
would then show that the system gives the two phones a busy signal. However,
what is true of two particular phones may not be true of all pairs of phones.
Therefore, the simulation would have to be carried out for every possible pair of
phones. Furthermore, in general, the simulations would have to be carried out
for every possible initial system and input state, and every possible sequence
of state changes of the remaining inputs—those not associated with the two
phones of interest. This adds up to an awful lot of simulations—one is probably
better off just trying out the various cases on the actual system.
The purpose of a theory is to provide generalizations which are useful in
explaining and predicting the behavior of the system. The high-level theory
provides relevant generalizations, whereas the low-level description does not.
Of course, there may be certain phenomena which the high-level theory does
not address, but which the low-level description does. For example, suppose
one bit of the memory cell that holds the state information for a given phone is
damaged. This may result in behavior that is difficult to characterize in terms
of the high-level theory. Thus some information is lost in the transformation
from the low-level description to the high-level theory. But the advantage of the
high-level theory is that it provides generalizations which are useful in predicting
most behaviors. Of course, the ultimate understanding may consist of high- and
low-level theories, and a mapping between the two levels. Indeed, one may feel
that one understands a system best if one understands the operation of the
system at a high level (its logical specification), the operation of the system at
a low level (its physical implementation), and the connection between the two.
The case of human cognition, however, is more difficult. Constructing a
complete low-level account of cognition faces the following obstacle: We cannot
take apart the brain in order to analyze its operation the way we can take apart
and analyze the electronic telephone switching system. It would destroy the
pattern of interest to us. That is, there is no way to, say, insert a sensor at
every neuron and synapse in order to gain a complete picture of the operation
of the brain.

10.3.

SCIENTIFIC UNDERPINNINGS

253

Using partial data or even complete data (if, perhaps, a way of scanning
the brain with sufficient time and space resolution were somehow eventually
realized), a low-level theory may be developed. However, in order for a lowlevel account to be useful, the constructs of the lower level must be related
to the more familiar high-level constructs—this was demonstrated even in the
simple case of the telephone switching system. In order for a low-level account
of cognition to succeed as an explanatory theory, high-level abstractions will
still have to be developed.
The transformations which map the high-level theory of the telephone
switching system to the low-level description of that same system were seen
to be fairly difficult. The transformations involved in mapping a knowledgelevel theory to a neuroscientific theory are likely to be orders of magnitude
more complex than this. (However, if materialism is true, there must be some
mapping.)
We emphasize a top-down approach toward the explanation of human behavior, while the neurosciences and connectionism emphasize a bottom-up approach. Using either approach, the task is extremely difficult. We start with
concepts from folk psychology, such as emotions, goals, and beliefs, and processes which operate on these concepts. These concepts and processes are continually refined to provide progressively better accounts of human behavior. We
hope that at each incremental modification of the theory, a useful level of explanation can be retained. The neurosciences and connectionism, however, attempt
to bootstrap human behavior starting from the structure of the human brain
and neurons or neuron-like units. But in the connectionist paradigm, for example, when a certain high-level behavior is produced, it is not always clear how
that behavior is actually generated. Saying that the schema is an “emergent
property” is not enough. How exactly does the schema emerge and why?
Perhaps in the end neither approach will succeed at providing an explanation, or perhaps one will and the other will not. Probably, as Churchland (1984)
points out, the end result will lie somewhere between a folk psychological explanation and a neuroscientific account. It will most likely involve the construction and conceptualization by humans of an entirely new, as yet unanticipated
taxonomy—what may become the folk psychology of future generations. Perhaps one or both of the approaches will succeed in achieving truly intelligent
behavior without retaining a useful explanation of that behavior. Even this, of
course, would be a significant accomplishment.

10.3.2

Goals and Limits of Artificial Intelligence

Why attempt to understand the mind? There are those who would argue that
explaining human intelligence is either impossible or, if possible, a misguided
endeavor: By succeeding at a complete mechanistic explanation of the mind,
all that is most unique and valued about our own humanity would be eliminated. First of all, such complete demystification is not probable in the near (or

254

CHAPTER

10.

UNDERPINNINGS

OF

A DAYDREAMING

THEORY

even not-so-near) future. Furthermore, by pursuing the enterprise of artificial
intelligence, our fascination with human intelligence and creativity will only be
strengthened. Because of the near intractability of human creativity, artificial
intelligence researchers will have no difficulty finding interesting problems to
look at for plenty of years to come. Artificial intelligence can be thought of
as another creative human endeavor—one which presents a difficult problem to
solve, a fun exercise, a new approach to discovering the many ways in which
humans are so amazing.
What are the limits of artificial intelligence? Will our efforts, if continued
over many years, eventually converge upon a complete theory of human intelligence? Will we reach a true thinking machine? Might we reach a limit point
after which no more progress could be made?
If functionalism is true, not only is it possible for a theory of intelligence to
be constructed in terms of a computer program, but, in principle, a computer
program could actually be intelligent. Obviously, DAYDREAMER is a long way
from having a true, human stream of consciousness. Computer programs are
not likely to approach the level of human intelligence for many years to come,
since the processing mechanisms, knowledge, and experiences which humans
have are so much more complex and rich than those which so far have been put
into computer programs.
Perhaps materialism is true and there will come a time when a fully human,
intelligent computer program will be developed. However, even if materialism
is true, we may not necessarily be able to construct such a program. It may be
logically impossible for the mind to understand itself, since, as Johnson-Laird

(1983) states the paradox, perhaps “the mind must be more complicated than
any theory proposed to explain it: the more complex the theory, the still more
complex the mind that thought of it in the first place” (p. 1). There are several
responses to this problem. Perhaps such a theory, while not constructible by
a single person, may be achieved by many persons working together. Perhaps
such a theory, while not understood by any single person, may be understood
by a collection of persons.
Sometimes it is argued that a mind understanding itself is impossible on
the grounds that infinite storage would be required: If a complete model of
the human mind were contained in a human mind, then this model would have
to contain yet another complete model, which in turn would have to contain

another complete model, and so on ad infinitum.!> However, through econom-

ical processing and representation of recursion, this problem may be avoided:
Instead of having a separate copy of the model embedded within each copy of
the model, the top-level model need only refer to itself recursively and for recursive processes to be carried out on a demand basis; how to accomplish this is
suggested by such programming language constructs as pointers and lazy evalu13But, as K. M. Colby (personal communication, February, 1987) points out, if the mind is
infinite, it could contain itself as a subset (just as the integers contain the even integers as an
isomorphic subgroup).

10.3.

SCIENTIFIC UNDERPINNINGS

255

ation (Sussman & Steele, 1975). As Minsky (1968) suggests (but using different
terminology), if an interpreter for a programming language is written in that
same language (assuming, of course, that the interpreter is eventually executed
by another hardware or software interpreter for that language with equivalent
behavior), the interpreter can be run on itself to see how it would operate on an
arbitrary program in that language (which itself could be the interpreter operating on yet another program in that language, and so on). There is no problem
with infinite storage since there need only be one copy of the interpreter. In
addition, several computer programs which can be said to introspect about their
own operation—in a way more interesting than simple self-interpretation—have

been constructed (B. Smith, 1982; Doyle, 1980).
Even if it were not logically impossible for the mind to understand itself,
the mind might still turn out to be too complex for a person or group of people
(even aided by partially intelligent computers!) to figure out. Perhaps the
experimental methods which are available for examining the mind will prove
insufficient.
Physiological mechanisms interact with psychological mechanisms and contribute much to the experience of being human (see, for example, Bloch, 1985).
Even if materialism is true, a truly human artificial intelligence (if we wanted to
construct one) might have to be embedded within a biological system (or within
a simulation of a biological system).
Programs that seem human will be constructed way before those programs
actually come close to achieving a level of intelligence comparable to that of
humans. Indeed, the programs PARRY (Colby, 1973, 1975, 1981) and ELIZA
(Weizenbaum, 1966) have already fooled some people, that is, passed weak
versions of the Turing test (discussed in the following section).
As our computer programs become more intelligent, we might find humans
becoming even more clever in order to demonstrate their superiority over their
mechanical counterparts. As R. E. Mueller (1963) puts it:
Perhaps the human mind has only been creating in low gear up to
row. If a computer was invented that outinvented man, imagine

how inventively man would try to outinvent the computer! (p. 152)
Materialism may turn out to be false—the phenomenological aspect of consciousness may turn out to be inexplicable in purely physical terms. Perhaps
after trying so hard to design a computer program with artificial consciousness, and achieving a device with equivalent behavior to a human with true
consciousness, we may find out that true phenomenological experiences are of a
nonphysical nature. Of course, if the behavior of the artificial system is identical
to the natural one, this might not make any difference to us. Another possibility
is that the behavior of the program will not be equivalent to human behavior in
very subtle ways—ways that depend on the true nature of mental phenomena.
For example, there might be something “not quite right” about the program’s
descriptions of its internal experiences.

256

CHAPTER

10.

UNDERPINNINGS OF

A DAYDREAMING

THEORY

As we construct closer and closer computer approximations to human intelligence, and as we run into difficulties, it may be very difficult to pinpoint the
cause of these difficulties: We are not smart enough, the systems lack physiology,
materialism is false, and so on.
Even if it eventually turns out that materialism is false—that a full computational account of intelligence is not possible—we will have gained insight
into those aspects of human cognition which are characterizable in these terms.
We will also have better knowledge of which aspects of intelligence are capturable and which are not. If it were to turn out that no part of intelligence is
capturable in computational terms, then we still will have gained insight into
artificial intelligence.
Whether or not all of our theoretical assumptions (such as materialism) turn
out to be true, and whether or not we ever converge upon a complete explanation of human behavior, we will have uncovered a whole range of previously
uninvestigated human cognitive phenomena and previously unasked questions.
We will thus have learned much about human thought processes.

10.3.3

Theory Construction, Testing, and Evaluation

What is the methodology for the construction of our computational theory of
daydreaming? How is such a theory tested? How do we evaluate such a theory? What constitutes a successful theory? In what senses might the processes
posited by the theory be considered equivalent to human mental processes?
Theory construction begins by examining one or more human daydream protocols. An initial theory is devised and implemented as a computer program
which is able to exhibit the behavior of these protocols and other, similar, protocols. The theory is not developed in a vacuum. Rather, previous related theories
from psychology, artificial intelligence, and philosophy are studied. Experiments
from the psychological literature are consulted in choosing among alternative
explanations of the same behavior. Because our objective is an explanatory theory of daydreaming at an appropriate level of abstraction, the theory is stated
in terms of knowledge-level representations which correspond roughly to folk
psychological notions such as emotions, goals, beliefs, attitudes, and so on.
A rudimentary test of the theory occurs in its implementation as a computer program. At the very least, the fact that the theory can be implemented
demonstrates that the theory is physically possible. Moreover, it ensures that
the theory does not depend on any hidden or mysterious mechanisms.
The theory is next tested by running the computer program. The program
is presented with various input states and actions in performance mode, and
the resulting external and daydreaming behaviors are observed. This exposes
various problems—the program may crash or it may otherwise not exhibit the
desired output behavior. Modifications are continually made to the initial theory and program in response to problems discovered from running the program.
In order to increase the generality of the theory and program, additional hu-

10.3.

SCIENTIFIC UNDERPINNINGS

257

man daydream protocols are considered and incorporated into the theory and
program.
Since everything must be made concrete in a computer program, there are
certain aspects of the program which might not be considered a part of the

theory. As Colby (1981) writes:
All the statements of a theory are intended to be taken as true, or as
candidates for truth, whereas some statements in the programming
language in the model, features necessary to get the model to run,
are intended to be read as false, or at least of uncertain truth value.

(p. 516)
That is, since a given theory must concentrate on some aspects of intelligence
while overlooking others, those parts of the program which deal with issues not
addressed by the theory must either accept input from a human, or be implemented in a simplistic fashion (analogous to the routines called “stubs” in
software engineering [Kernighan & Plauger, 1976]). Indeed, one of the advantages of implementing a theory as a computer program is the discovery of such
loose ends. At first, one may devise a quick, specific solution or “kludge” to enable the program to handle such a situation. However, upon closer examination
of the situation, substantial theoretical issues may be revealed. One may then
update the theory and program in order to handle that situation (and others) in
a more general fashion. Alternatively, that situation may justifiably be deemed
beyond the scope of the theory. A theory is best developed in conjunction with
the writing of the program.
Once the behavior of the program has achieved rough face validity—that is,
the output more or less resembles the modeled daydreaming behavior—more

exacting tests may be employed: Turing (1950) proposed the “imitation game”
as a test for computer intelligence: Suppose there are three persons—a woman,
a man, and an interrogator of either sex. The interrogator is in a separate
room from the woman and man, and communicates with them via a teletype
connection.
The task of the interrogator is to determine which of the two
persons is the woman and which is the man. The man attempts to fool the
interrogator into thinking he is the woman, and the woman attempts to convince
the interrogator that she is the woman. Suppose now that a computer takes
the place of the man. Turing contends that the computer may be considered
intelligent if it is able to fool the interrogator as often as a man is able to. What is
often called the Turing test is a modified version of this game: If an interrogator
is allowed to converse freely with a computer program, and after some long
length of time the interrogator is fooled into thinking the program is a human,
that computer program is said to have passed the Turing test. The Turing test
therefore ascribes importance to the input-output behavior of the human or
computer program (rather than to other attributes). A Turing-like test may be
used to evaluate a program which models some aspect of human intelligence: If
the output of the program cannot be distinguished from the output of a human

258

CHAPTER

10.

UNDERPINNINGS

OF

A DAYDREAMING

THEORY

engaged in the activity modeled by that program, the program passes the test.
Other authors (Hofstadter & Dennett, 1981; Colby, 1981; Heiser, Colby, Faught,
& Parkison, 1980) treat Turing-like tests in greater detail.
How might a Turing-like test be applied to DAYDREAMER? One might
argue that such a test is insufficient because daydreaming is an output-less
activity—any program could pass such a test for daydreaming! As Weizenbaum
(1974) pointed out in a letter to the Communications of the ACM, a program
which responds to each input of an interrogator in the same way as an autistic patient—that is, not an iota—hardly constitutes an explanation of autism.
However, daydreaming as defined here—as a verbal report of the stream of
consciousness—is not an output-less activity. The daydreams produced by the
current DAYDREAMER resemble those of a human daydreamer to a large degree; however, we suspect that the output of the program can be distinguished
from human daydream protocols. This is due in part to the current English
generator—perhaps if daydreams generated by a human and daydreams generated by the program were both edited for style by a human, the resulting
daydreams would be indistinguishable. However, we have not yet attempted
such an experiment.

10.3.4

Pylyshyn’s Strong Equivalence

Pylyshyn (1984) argues that if a computer program is to be taken literally as
a model of human behavior, the program must generate behavior in the same
way as a human. In other words, he argues that a Turing-like test is too weak a
criterion for an explanatory theory—rather, up to some level of granularity, the
processes carried out by the program and by the human should be equivalent.
He proposes the notion of “strong equivalence.” Informally, two programs are
strongly equivalent if they carry out the “same” algorithm. If two programs
carry out the “same” algorithm, it should be possible to run both programs
directly on the same functional architecture: Consider the random access machine, which has an infinite number of memory locations, accessible in a single
step by address. Although Turing machines have the same computational power
(are able to compute the same functions) as random access machines, there are
certain algorithms—such as hashing—which can be directly executed on a random access machine, but not on a Turing machine. In order to run a hashing
algorithm on a Turing machine, random access memory would have to be simulated. This can be accomplished by using the Turing machine’s tape to store
the contents of memory and accessing locations by scanning the tape until the
desired location is reached. But in the process of simulation, the computational
complexity of the program (measure of space and time necessary for a computation as a function of the input) is increased—on a Turing machine the number
of steps to retrieve an item is dependent upon the total number of stored items,
whereas on a random access machine the number of steps is independent of the
number of items.

10.3.

SCIENTIFIC UNDERPINNINGS

259

Consequently, complexity is a way of defining what is meant by direct execution of a program on a given functional architecture—if the basic operations
of a program are not realized by the functional architecture in a number of steps
independent of the input, then, by definition, the program is not executed directly by that architecture. A program which employs random access as a basic
operation may therefore not be executed directly on a Turing machine. Strong
equivalence of two processes requires that both processes run directly on the
same functional architecture. Of course, a major task in constructing a cognitive model is that of finding the unknown functional architecture of cognition.
The use of complexity measures and reaction-time experiments using humans
may assist in this process. The strongest requirement for equivalence might be
phenomenological equivalence—that the behavior be experienced subjectively in
the same way. We have already discussed the paradoxes involved in such a
notion.
There are several problems with Pylyshyn’s arguments: First, he argues
that Turing (input-output) equivalence is too weak and proposes the notion of
“strong equivalence” which makes use of complexity equivalence and reaction
times. But Turing equivalence does not necessarily free a theory from accounting for reaction times: For example, reaction times may be reflected in verbal
behavior simply by requesting that a subject count out loud while not verbalizing, or by reading elapsed time off a stopwatch before each verbalization. Even
if we do not require reaction-time equivalence, there are many important features of the functional architecture which can be correct without satisfying the
criteria for strong equivalence. There are significant aspects of the functional architecture serving to determine behavior which can implemented using different
algorithms. For example, failing (rather than delaying) at recalling something
because it has not recently been primed is typically explained at the level of
functional architecture (e.g., in terms of a spreading activation mechanism).
And yet, this mechanism could be implemented using very different algorithms

(for example, one on a Turing machine, one on a random access machine) not
satisfying complexity equivalence. Thus even weak Turing equivalence is really
not so weak.
Second, Pylyshyn appears to require that primitive operations of the functional architecture have a time complexity independent of input. A problem
with this is that the primitives of most cognitive science architectures, present
and future, hardly have this property: Spreading activation, for example, might
have a time complexity dependent upon the lengths of connections in memory.
There is no a priori reason for the functional architecture of cognition not to
be implemented using various levels of interpretation. Perhaps there is theoretical justification for this view; however, Pylyshyn does not address the basic
problem that functional architectures with the same primitive operations can
be, and often are, implemented in radically different physical systems with resulting radically different complexity properties. For example, a random access
machine can be implemented directly in hardware, or it can be implemented

260

CHAPTER 10.

UNDERPINNINGS

OF

A DAYDREAMING

THEORY

in microcode on a very fast Turing machine. If this requirement for primitive
operations is enforced, then it is likely that the primitives of the functional architecture will not be very complex. When the primitives are thus constrained,
all the ways of implementing them at the physical level will probably turn out
to be the same algorithm. Thus this requirement has the side effect that two
strongly equivalent programs will not simply be equivalent up to the level of
the functional architecture, but since the functional architectures on which the
programs are based are also implemented in the same way, the two programs
will be equivalent all the way down to the physical level. This dilutes the notion
of strong equivalence as an “abstract sameness” of algorithms only up to the
symbol level. The problem is probably that degrees of “sameness” cannot be
quantized.
If, on the other hand, primitive operations are not required to have time
complexity independent of input, then reaction time experiments no longer constrain the functional architecture; instead, they constrain the entire implementation down to the physical level. This destroys the utility of reaction time tests
for strong equivalence, which is only equivalence up to the level of functional

architecture. However, reaction times could be used to test for a “stronger”
equivalence requiring that the two programs execute the same algorithm all
the way down to the physical level. Thus we have argued that either strong
equivalence, as defined, ends up being all the way down to the physical level, or
reaction times are useless in assessing strong equivalence.
Third, Pylyshyn is not clear on the issues of: (a) how complexity equivalence
serves to locate the symbol-semantics boundary (although it is clear how the criterion of cognitive penetrability accomplishes this, even if it is just a restatement
of the definition of the symbol-semantics distinction [see also Johnson-Laird,
1983, p. 152]), (b) how finding an appropriate symbol-semantics boundary (via
any method) implies there is strong equivalence, (c) whether the program which
runs on the functional architecture is identical to the semantic level (although
the answer to this is most probably yes, it is far from clear, and there are problems: it appears that a semantic level program could not contribute complexity
effects, because any such effects would be the result of cognitively impenetrable
operations; yet paradoxically, strong equivalence is defined as equivalence up to,
but not including, the functional level; that is, the programs which run on the

functional level [semantical-level programs] must be equivalent; but this then

means that complexity equivalence is meaningless as a test for strong equiva-

lence), and (d) how the cognitive penetrability criterion ensures that the division
of levels in the program corresponds to the division of levels in the person (this
might be the case if the program has already been shown to be weakly equivalent to the person; however, if the program is weakly equivalent to the human,
the levels are already correct).

10.3.

SCIENTIFIC UNDERPINNINGS

10.3.5

261

Discussion

In the body of this book, we have specified our theory in English, with the major
propositions typeset in italics. A detailed description of the DAYDREAMER
computer program itself is given in Chapter 7.
Our theory of daydreaming represents one possible way in which daydreaming behavior may be produced. How might we evaluate whether and to what
degree this behavior is achieved in the same way in humans? Both the major
propositions of the theory and the detailed algorithms may be tested empirically. Although conducting appropriate psychological experiments is beyond
the scope and resources of the present work, it will be useful to conduct such
experiments in the future.
From one or more propositions of the theory, further consequences or side
effects of the theory may be inferred. Nonobvious implications of the theory
may also be discovered through observation of the behavior of the program—
some consequences arise only when the dynamic behavior of a theory is explored
in a running program. If predictions generated by the theory and program are
validated experimentally, confidence in the theory is reinforced. This is the
case whether or not the experimental evidence existed previously—provided
that this evidence was not consulted in constructing the theory. Checking a
theory against the data from which it was derived hardly serves to validate
that theory (although it may serve as a check that we have not lost sight of the
data). Rather, a theory must be tested through independent and indirect means.
Whenever aspects of the theory have been derived from existing experimental
evidence, relevant literature is cited in the text. If existing evidence for a given
proposition of the theory is sufficiently conclusive, there is no need to test that
proposition further. It may, however, be necessary to test that proposition in
interaction with other propositions of the theory.
In addition, there are potential problems in validating a theory through
its ability to explain (new) behaviors after the fact—rather than predicting

behaviors before the fact. Rapaport (1960, p. 18, footnote) gives suggestions
on the proper handling of such “postdiction” by a theory: It is necessary to make
explicit what information is given in the behavioral data and what information
can only be inferred (in a nonobvious manner) by postdiction from the given
information.
Predictions regarding computational complexity may be generated by the
theory and program. One example is the algorithm for serendipity which is
presented in Chapter 5. The way the program carries out a given task might
then be shown to be “strongly equivalent” to how humans carry out a similar
task—this would be accomplished by measuring the reaction times of humans
in a certain set of situations and comparing these times with the reaction times
of the program in those situations.
However, if a prediction generated by the program turns out to be incorrect—
sometimes this is obvious, as when the program crashes—there are two possi-

262

CHAPTER

10.

UNDERPINNINGS

OF A DAYDREAMING

THEORY

bilities: Either the program does not correspond to the theory, or the program
does correspond to the theory and the theory is (at least in part) incorrect. At
this point, one must examine the theory and program and devise appropriate
modifications. Testing the program and theory is thus important not only to
validate the program and theory, but to suggest improvements in the program
and theory.
Another means of evaluating DAYDREAMER is in terms of the proposed
functions of daydreaming discussed in Chapter 1. In previous chapters, we
have already discussed how the eos achieves the functions of learning and
creative problem solving.
DAYDREAMER as presented in this book is the result of many revisions (E.
T. Mueller & Dyer, 1985a; E. T. Mueller & Dyer, 1985b). The behavior of
the program resembles that of a human daydreamer—to what degree remains a
question for future research. DAYDREAMER appears to account for much of the
daydreaming behavior of humans, although a number of aspects of the theory
are still to be tested in the psychological laboratory. Most likely, DAYDREAMER
will succeed at some future tests and fail at others. Considering the magnitude
of the problem, we consider it to be an achievement simply to have constructed a
plausible computational theory of daydream production. Although this theory
may not represent the way that daydreams are generated, it represents one
possible way that daydreams may be produced—for now this must suffice since,
to our knowledge, no alternative computational theories of daydreaming have
yet been proposed. Thus DAYDREAMER is really a point of departure for future
theories of daydreaming. We expect this theory to be continually refined in the
years to come.

Chapter 11

Future Work
Conclusions

and

Capturing daydreaming computationally is a difficult task. Nonetheless, this
book has shown how behavior resembling protocols of human daydreaming may
be produced using a few simple but powerful mechanisms.
In response to external and internal circumstances, the program activates,
processes, and terminates multiple concerns. Each concern is an instance of a
personal goal or ongoing life objective of the program.
Concerns are motivated by data structures called emotions which determine
which concern to process at any given time. The strengths of these emotions,
while initially set according to the intrinsic importances of particular personal
goals, are subject to dynamic modification as unexpected consequences of a
concern are recognized.
The sequences of both fanciful and realistic events which make up daydream
scenarios are produced using the building blocks of planning and inference rules
and episodes. Planning rules specify methods of varying degrees of plausibility
for breaking down a subgoal into further subgoals, while inference rules specify
consequences of various situations.
Daydream scenarios are generated by the planning mechanism which repeatedly applies planning and inference rules to a selected concern. The planning
mechanism is employed to generate possible behaviors of the daydreamer as well
as the possible behaviors of others.
A mechanism for modifying existing daydream scenarios is the mutation of
the objectives of unsuccessful action subgoals.
Episodes are aggregates of rule instances applied in a concrete real or imagined situation. Some episodes are hand-coded and provided to the program as
input, while others are generated as the program daydreams and interacts in the
simulated real world. Episodes are indered in episodic memory under subgoal

263

CHAPTER 11.

264

FUTURE

WORK AND CONCLUSIONS

objectives, emotions, persons, and other features. Once retrieved, past episodes
may be applied, in whole or in part, to a new concern by the analogical planning
mechanism. Episodes reduce search in planning and enable scenario details to
be filled in.
The serendipity mechanism recognizes the unexpected applicability of some

possibility (external or internal situation or retrieved episode) related to one
concern, to another active concern. The serendipity mechanism conducts an
intersection search, from a point associated with a new possibility to a point
associated with an active concern, through the space of currently accessible
planning rules. Found paths are then verified by progressive unification and
employed through analogical planning. Once a serendipity occurs, the resulting
plan is stored in episodic memory so that in the future a similar plan can be
generated without having to chance upon a similar serendipity.
A collection of daydreaming goals augment the program’s personal goals and
initiate useful daydreaming activity. The daydreaming goals of rationalization
(generating scenarios to rationalize a failure), roving (shifting attention from an
unpleasant failure), and revenge (generating scenarios in which revenge is attained) model the daydreaming which humans perform in order to reduce negative emotional states. The daydreaming goals of reversal (generating scenarios
in which a past or imagined future failure is avoided), recovery (generating scenarios in which a goal which failed in the past succeeds in the future), rehearsal
(generating possible scenarios for achieving an active goal), and repercussions
(exploring and planning for hypothetical future situations) enable the program
to improve its future external behavior—to learn.
Learning through daydreaming is accomplished by adding daydreamed
episodes to memory: Various alternative scenarios involving a given situation are
generated, evaluated as to their realism and desirability, and stored as episodes.
When a similar situation arises in the future, the best and most similar retrieved
episode is applied to that situation through analogical planning. Generation of
hypothetical future scenarios improves the behavior of the program since negative consequences of various courses of action can be detected in advance and
thus avoided.

Learning is also accomplished by adding new planning and inference rules: In
response to a side effect real or imagined failure, the reversal daydreaming goal
determines what actions might have been taken in order to avoid that failure.
Rules are then created to anticipate similar failures in the future and carry out
appropriate actions to prevent those failures.
In this chapter, we present:

(a) possible extensions to, and applications for,

DAYDREAMER, (b) the limitations of DAYDREAMER and how they arise, (c)
how these limitations might be overcome in the future, and (d) final closing
remarks.

11.1.

EVENTUAL

11.1

APPLICATIONS AND EXTENSIONS

265

Eventual Applications and Extensions

The components of DAYDREAMER described above are largely independent
of the particular interpersonal domain of the program. Thus DAYDREAMER
provides a framework for the construction of daydreaming systems in other domains. The components of DAYDREAMER which are dependent upon the domain are: (a) planning and inference rules, (b) personal goals, and (c) episodes.
For other domains it may be necessary to add new daydreaming goals to the
system. However, the existing set enables the system to daydream—which provides useful functions such as learning from past mistakes and anticipation of
future experiences.
In this section, we consider the following domains for the potential future
application of DAYDREAMER: autonomous robots, operating systems, creative
writing, conversation, art and music, psychotherapy and psychiatry, and education and games.

11.1.1

Autonomous

Robots

Currently, DAYDREAMER interacts in a simulated world whose behavior is determined in part by a human user who types in English phrases describing
actions and states in that world. Eventually, however, DAYDREAMER could
be employed as the controlling program for an autonomous robot interacting in
the real world (or some part of the real world). A self-contained robot needs to
decide what to do next. Multiple personal goals and motivating emotions provide this function. A household robot, for example, might have such ongoing
objectives as: recharging batteries, pleasing owner, preparing meals, keeping
house clean, watering plants, and so on. Emotions would be tuned to the intrinsic importance as well as dynamic urgency of a given objective or need.
Such an autonomous robot would have to cope with situations, and improve at
coping with various situations, without explicit human assistance. If the owner
requested Shao Mai for breakfast the following morning, the robot might start
daydreaming about preparing them and realize that some ingredient is missing
and needs to be purchased. If the owner were about to leave for a week, the
robot might daydream about one of its batteries failing and as a result tell the
owner to leave it a spare. Although such a household robot is beyond what can
be achieved with current technology, a rudimentary daydreaming robot with
simple motion and object sensors and a limited set of spoken input commands
could be constructed today.

11.1.2

Operating Systems

The notion of spending free time planning for future events can be applied to
computer operating systems. When otherwise unoccupied with processing, the
system could daydream about future operations of the user in order to perform

266

CHAPTER 11.

FUTURE WORK AND CONCLUSIONS

those operations in part or otherwise prepare for those operations. For example,
while unoccupied with processing in the early morning hours, the system might

anticipate two of its heavy users creating large data files the following day
whose size would exceed the remaining space in a certain file system. It might
then relocate one of the users to another file system, or send messages to the
users informing them of the potential problem. Even during normal daytime
processing, the system might anticipate the use of a particular file (such as a
mail file upon logging in) and start loading that file. Any operations with side
effects (other than those involving performance) carried out during daydreaming
would be tentative and subject to rollback using a mechanism such as nested
transactions (E. T. Mueller, 1983). In general, maintaining consistency of the
system in the face of daydreaming is an interesting topic for future research.

11.1.3

Creative Writing

Since human daydreaming often involves the generation of creative possibilities,
daydreaming will be a useful component of a creative computer program. Constructing a program which assists the user in solving a problem by suggesting
and organizing the application of various general brainstorming (Osborn, 1953),

lateral thinking (de Bono, 1970), or conceptual blockbusting (J. L. Adams, 1974)
techniques is relatively easy. However, a version of DAYDREAMER equipped
with suitable representations of the problem domain would be able to suggest
specific solutions to a problem.
The plot-oriented aspect of daydreaming (Klinger, 1971, p. 142; S. Freud,
1908/1962) suggests the potential application of DAYDREAMER to the creative domain of story invention.1
The plots of RATIONALIZATIONI and
REVENGE1, for example, resemble those of several recent motion pictures.
DAYDREAMER could provide initial ideas for stories, animations, or live-action
films, and once begun, suggest continuations, modifications, or further possibilities.
The program would have to be extended with appropriate personal and
daydreaming goals for story invention. As input, the program would take any
constraints of the user, such as characters and their personality traits, initial
situations, desired outcome situations, points to convey, and the like. As output,
the program would produce several stories satisfying—or even not satisfying—
those constraints (and a modified episodic memory of the program for use in
generating future stories). The output stories could be generated in English or
even fed to a visual invention system for graphical animation.
DAYDREAMER could also be used at an entirely different level in story
invention: as a means of generating accounts of the internal thought sequences
and daydreams of story characters.
1Metz (1982), however, likens daydreaming to the viewing of a film.

11.1.

EVENTUAL

11.1.4

APPLICATIONS AND EXTENSIONS

267

Conversation

J. L. Singer (1981) has suggested that daydreaming allows more creative conversation and social interaction. An example of this may be found in a protocol of a

conversation recorded by Hobbs and D. A. Evans (1980) (although such creative

aspects were not the point of their work). The subject, discussing her daughter’s
entry to an art contest, interjects the following daydream-like scenario into the
conversation:
You send it to a P.O. box. ... What happens if you have dishonest
mailmen ...and they see all these things going to an art contest, so
they open it up and change it so that it’s being sent from them? (p.
357)

Daydreaming, both prior to and during a conversation, will be useful in
conversational computer systems to liven up the quality of the interaction. Fur-

thermore, it has been observed (Schank, 1977) that what one may say in a conversation is a subset of the things that come to mind. Reik (1948) conversely
observes that “thoughts are speeches not made, or condemned to silence” (p.
208). Although modeling “what comes to mind” in conversational contexts involves processes which not addressed by DAYDREAMER, a system which is able
to daydream in conversational situations may indeed provide one component of
a conversational computer system.

11.1.5

Art and Music

Artists, composers, choreographers, novelists, and poets daydream in images of
their respective media. For example, Housman (1952, p. 91) reports new lines
of verse flowing through his mind while taking a walk. According to Copland
(1980), composers have “the ability to imagine sounds in advance of their being

heard” (p. 24). Shapero (1946/1952) writes that “if [a composer] focuses his
attention on a definite key and beats mentally in a chosen meter, musical images
will be set in motion in his mind, and the entire musical texture generated in

this way” (p. 52).
DAYDREAMER may be adapted for applications in various art forms by the
provision of an appropriate set of personal goals, daydreaming goals, planning
and inference rules, and episodes. This task is naturally accomplished by the
artist, who would probably start by providing the program with representations
of the artist’s own style and techniques, including appropriate visual (Arnheim,
1974), musical, or other principles, works of past artists, and so on. The artist
would run the program, examine its products, and revise the rules as appropriate. Of course, in constructing and revising representations, the artist need not
be limited to the existing style and technique of that artist. Rather, the artist
may experiment with new ideas whose expression or execution in conventional

268

CHAPTER

11.

FUTURE WORK AND CONCLUSIONS

media would be impractical or impossible. Thus the artist might evolve a new
style possible only in the computational medium.
A version of DAYDREAMER equipped with suitable representations might
be applied in the following ways: First, the program could function as an artist’s
apprentice: It could be used to generate ideas which the artist might not otherwise have thought of, or to execute ideas which the artist might not otherwise
have been able to execute. These ideas could then be incorporated into artistic
works or discarded as the artist saw fit. Second, if the program evolved to a
point where the artist considered its output as valid works of art, the program
could function as an artist’s prory: Works produced by the program would be
fully authorized by the artist. In this case, one might adopt the view that it is
not the output of the program which is the work of art, but the program itself
and its entire range of potential output. Thus such a program might function
as art object.
Is it possible to create art in the medium of computation? Can one internalize and habituate oneself to this medium to the extent necessary for artistic
expression? There are certainly obstacles to algorithmic art at present: The
languages available for expressing computational ideas are generally too rigid,
too concerned with details, too fragile in the face of incompleteness and inconsistency. Not every artist will wish to set aside years of training in traditional
media in order to pursue computation. Perhaps we will have to wait until future
generations of artists who as children learned about frames, production rules,
and unification along with the three Rs.
Many artists would probably choose to withhold their programs from distribution in order to prevent others from learning how their program operates,
constructing derivative versions, or producing further works using the program.
Nonetheless, there is a necessity to avoid reduplication of effort; some artists and
programmers would probably choose to make their basic representations of art
and music theory and history available to others. A potential danger, of course,
with the wildfire-like spread of artistic computer programs, is that everyone’s
work would become homogeneous (not to mention the problems of copyrights
and royalties). Artists would therefore avoid basing their work on previous
programs—except for a basic set of tools sufficiently rich to enable many artists
to construct unique and diverse works (just as the tools of conventional media
enable the production of new and different works).
If an artist’s program were distributed to others, that program and its outputs would be more vulnerable to analysis than are conventional works of art.
After all, the program provides an explicit, complete model of how its outputs
are generated. Would examination of such a program reduce the apparent creativity of its outputs? First of all, the program might be of such a level of
complexity that it would not be possible to understand exactly how it produces
a given output. But even if one were able to understand how the program
worked, one would have to realize, as with any creative product, that it is much
easier to understand a product after the fact than to have thought of it in the

11.1.

EVENTUAL

APPLICATIONS AND EXTENSIONS

269

first place.
If a new artistic program is derived from a program written by another
artist, is that program then a joint work? When, if ever, does a derivative work
cease to be the work of the original artist? Is computational art culture best
developed through the sharing of programs or should interaction among artists
be restricted to observation of program output behavior??

Although the productions of an artistic program should not consist of mere
“variations,” there would nonetheless appear to be fundamental limits on the
quantity of creative products which could be generated. That is, the more we
ask a program to generate outputs, the less creative those outputs are likely
to seem.
Does generating a large quantity of outputs automatically negate
the value of those outputs (or might the outputs taken as a collection still be

considered creative)? Can it be that artistic value is subject to some sort of law
of conservation—that only a certain number of objects or “chunked” classes of
objects may be considered creative at a time? We leave questions such as these
to art theorists and to future experience with artistic computer programs.
Actually, artists and composers have already begun to experiment with such

programs: Hiller and Isaacson (1959) constructed a program which was used to
compose the Illiac Suite for String Quartet; Xenakis (1971) employed computers to assist in his stochastic compositions; H. Cohen (H. Cohen, B. Cohen, &
Nii, 1984) wrote a program able to create its own drawings based on heuristic
rules; Whitney (1980) has used computers to execute a form of animated visual
art based on an analogy with harmonic relationships in music; and so on (see,
for example, the reviews and discussions of Hiller, 1984, R. E. Mueller, 1983,
Sofer, 1981, Leavitt, 1976, Cope, 1976, pp. 77-114). What DAYDREAMER adds
to this previous work is a framework for the construction of creative programs;
this framework consists of the following components: multiple creative tasks
directed by emotions and daydreaming goals, recognition and exploitation of
serendipitous relationships among tasks, fanciful possibility generation through
arbitrary mutation and other methods, storage and later application of previous experiences, learning from mistakes, and knowledge representation in the
form of both generic rules and episodes. Whereas in DAYDREAMER, episodes
are employed in generating new daydreams, in an advanced artistic program,
episodes might function in a contrary fashion: The system might actually try
to avoid creating new works similar to episodes representing previous works.

11.1.6

Psychotherapy and Psychiatry

DAYDREAMER could eventually be employed as a model to test various strategies for treating depression (see, for example, Beck, 1967) and for investigating
the processes that might lead to depression. In addition, certain modifications
2R. E. Mueller (1967, pp. 273-274) discusses similar issues.

270

CHAPTER

11.

FUTURE

WORK AND CONCLUSIONS

to DAYDREAMER might lead to behavior resembling various pathological conditions of humans.
What is the long-term impact on the behavior of DAYDREAMER of various
sets of daydreaming strategies? Which combinations are more advantageous
and which are less so? The RATIONALIZATION, ROVING, and REVENGE
daydreaming goals serve the function of reducing negative emotional states.
What would happen to the behavior of DAYDREAMER in the long run if one
or more of these goals were removed? What would happen if these strategies
were applied excessively? If, for example, RATIONALIZATION were removed,
but ROVING were retained, the program would reduce negative emotions but
never alter the negative emotions associated with episodes. It might, therefore,
remain depressed as a result of “repressing” its negative emotions—immediately
diverting attention from negative emotions and not coping with them through
long-term modifications such as that provided by RATIONALIZATION.
If all daydreaming goals were removed, DAYDREAMER would be unable
to improve its behavior in response to performance mode experiences, plan for
future ones, or reduce negative emotional states. It would most likely end up
in a negative state. If performance mode were removed, DAYDREAMER would
never be able to achieve its personal goals and would therefore also end up in a
negative state.
Perhaps it is when certain daydreaming strategies get out of hand that personality disorders such as paranoia begin to develop, as suggested by the following anecdote (reported by Dyer, 1983c):
A man was driving along a lonely road late at night when his car
ran out of gas. He remembered seeing a farm house a mile back, and
so started walking toward it. As he walked along he thought: “It’s
pretty late. If someone were to awaken me at this hour, I might
be pretty annoyed.” He kept on thinking along these lines: “The
farmer will have to get dressed and siphon gas out of his tractor for
me. He may find that very inconvenient...” As he approached the
farmhouse he became more and more annoyed.
The farmer was awakened by loud knocking at his door. When
he went down to answer it, there stood a man who barked:

needs your stupid gas anyway!”
(Dyer, 1983c, p. 76)

“Who

and then stomped off into the night.

Daydreaming can result in the excessive raising or lowering of expectations;
without appropriate controls, daydreaming can cause one to lose touch with

reality. In DAYDREAMER, such an effect could be achieved through the removal
of reality assessment: The program would then generate external behavior in
accordance with unrealistic daydreams; its expectations of the world’s behavior
in response to its own would be too high, and it would fail at achieving its
personal goals in the short and long term.

11.2,

SHORTCOMINGS

OF THE PROGRAM

2A

Although worrying has its disadvantages, as one can see from the above
story, worrying also serves the useful function of anticipating possible future
events and planning for them. There is a subtle line between adaptive and maladaptive instances of daydreaming. J. L. Singer (1975, pp. 180-204) discusses
the relationship between daydreaming and psychopathology in some detail.

11.1.7

Education

and Games

There are potential applications of DAYDREAMER in education and games for
children and adults. Just as LOGO (Papert, 1980) enables one to experiment
with the consequences of a few graphics primitives, a suitably simplified DAYDREAMER (perhaps using a representation based on English phrasal patterns
instead of slot-filler objects) would enable one to enter a few daydreaming rules,
and run the program to see what it generates. DAYDREAMER could eventually
be used as part of a shared daydreaming game in which the user and computer
would take turns in expanding out possible scenarios in some domain.

11.2

Shortcomings of the Program

DAYDREAMER cannot daydream for a long time and cannot generate many
novel sequences.
Unexpected behaviors of the program were more useful in
understanding possible daydreaming pathologies and flaws in the details of the
mechanism, than they were for generating truly novel solutions to interpersonal
problem situations.
One unexpected behavior was an infinite daydreaming loop. Before a mechanism was added to inhibit the activation of multiple top-level goals with the
same objective, the following cycle occurred: The REVERSAL daydreaming goal
would generate an alternative scenario in which the first of two personal goal
failures resulting from an earthquake was avoided. (REVERSAL is only able to

plan to avoid one failure at a time in the current version of DAYDREAMER..)
Since the second personal goal still failed in this scenario, a new REVERSAL
daydreaming goal would be activated to avoid the second failure. This in turn
resulted in a scenario in which failure of the second personal goal was avoided,
but failure of the first still occurred. Thus another REVERSAL daydreaming
goal would be activated for the first personal goal and the cycle would repeat
indefinitely.
A flaw that was discovered in the system was its failure to terminate a REHEARSAL daydreaming goal once the activity to be rehearsed was being carried
out in reality. Thus the system might continue to rehearse an action after it had
already been completed. This flaw in fact led to an unanticipated, but valid,
serendipity: when the waiter serves Guy was received as input during an actual
M-DATE experience, this action was detected as serendipitously applicable to

a still active REHEARSAL concern for that M-DATE.

272

CHAPTER

11.

FUTURE

WORK AND CONCLUSIONS

Whether the program’s various mechanisms will be sufficient for the generation of truly novel daydreams as well as long-term learning and emotion
regulation remains to be seen. The length of continuous nonredundant daydreaming and its degree of novelty is limited in the current program by several
interacting factors:

e Set of rules and episodes: This set is less than some “critical mass” (if
there is such as thing) necessary for the generation of an endless variety
of daydreams.
e Susceptibility to minor bugs: If a rule or episode is coded incorrectly, daydreams which could be generated by that rule of episode are not generated,

or the future behavior of the program is adversely affected. Unification,
the basis of most of the program’s operations, is very sensitive to the exact
form of representations.

e Speed of the program: By its very nature, daydreaming eats processing
time and a supercomputer was not available. Although many optiinizations have been employed, such as rule chaining and indexing of facts in
contexts, the program is still quite slow. It takes many hours to find out
the results of a given addition to the program. In conjunction with the
above problem involving minor bugs, this makes it difficult to add rules
and episodes.
e Degree of program tailoring: Whenever the program fails to produce a
desired daydream, an incorrect rule or mechanism is fixed. Although it
is important for the program mechanisms to function properly, it is less
clear to what extent one should be permitted to modify the set of rules.
As one continually adjusts rules to attain some desired behavior of the
program, one gets the feeling that it is the programmer, rather than the
program, who is carrying out the process of search. When program execution is slow, this advance search by the programmer speeds debugging
of the essential components of the program. Unfortunately, the more the
program is tailored in advance by the programmer, the less likely it is to
generate novel products.
The speed of the program could be improved to some degree through various modifications. For example, contexts never to be used again in the future
could be destroyed and the storage reclaimed. Such contexts consume time during garbage collection and may also slow the program down through increased
paging because the contexts are scattered in virtual memory. Ultimately, DAYDREAMER must be reimplemented in a machine with at least the power of a

Connection Machine (Hillis, 1985).
The program’s susceptibility to minor bugs could be lessened through the
use of relaxed unification. Techniques for relaxed unification include: ignoring
variable type restrictions, ignoring a small number of slots which fail to unify,

11.3.

OVERDETERMINATION

OF DAYDREAMING

273

ignoring minor differences of type, and so on. Relaxed unification could also
be used as a component of relared analogical planning—the application of an
episode to goals which match the goal of the episode only in a relaxed fashion. In
exchange for a reduced number of rules failing to fire when they should (errors of
omission), however, this will increase the number of rules which fire when they

should not (errors of commission).

Thus “incorrect” daydreams might result,

and strategies for pruning incorrect sequences would have to be devised. In
addition, the system would become even slower as a result of having to generate
and test these additional possibilities.
Techniques will have to be devised for automatically acquiring the rules and
hand-coded episodes*® necessary to generate novel daydream scenarios. This
would ease the task of extending the program and might at the same time
provide a solution to the problems of program tailoring and bug susceptibility.
A future DAYDREAMER should be able not only to learn through daydreaming,
but also to learn how to daydream.
In the following section, we present an alternative architecture for daydreaming which may help overcome the above shortcomings of the current system.
This architecture is presented as one possible topic for future research in machine daydreaming.

11.3.

Overdetermination

of Daydreaming

What factors are responsible for the production of the daydream REVENGEI1
(see page 4)? In the current version of DAYDREAMER, this daydream results
from a REVENGE daydreaming goal activated in response to a failed LOVERS
goal in LOVERS1: Achieving a position of prestige, that of being a famous movie
star, results in the movie star having a positive attitude toward DAYDREAMER
so that he will ask her out on a date, so that she can turn him down, so that
she can obtain revenge. On the other hand, this daydream can also be seen to
fulfill a RECOVERY daydreaming goal resulting from the SOCIAL ESTEEM
goal which also failed in LOVERS1: Achieving a position of prestige results in
the star having a positive attitude toward DAYDREAMER, resulting in success
of the same social esteem goal which previously failed.
How might the above daydream have been generated in a human? There
are three logical possibilities (if our assumption that daydreaming goals are the
source of daydreams is correct): First, it may be that the daydream is generated in response to the REVENGE daydreaming goal and the daydream simply
happens to satisfy the RECOVERY daydreaming goal. Alternatively, it may be
that the daydream is generated in response to the RECOVERY daydreaming
goal and the daydream simply happens to satisfy the REVENGE daydreaming
goal. The third possibility is that the daydream may have been the result of
30f course, DAYDREAMER already acquires episodes through interactions in performance
mode and also through storage of previous daydreams.

274

CHAPTER

11.

FUTURE

WORK AND CONCLUSIONS

combined efforts to satisfy both the REVENGE and RECOVERY daydreaming
goals simultaneously.
The latter case is an example of the principle of overdetermination introduced
by Breuer and S. Freud (1895/1937, pp. 156, 219). This principle states that
a behavior (such as a symptom or dream element) generally stems, not from a
single cause, but from a combination of causes. That is, while any single cause
is insufficient to result in the given behavior, several causes taken together are
sufficient to result in that behavior.
There are numerous examples of overdetermination in the products of cognition: S. Freud (1900/1965, pp. 311-339) shows how events represented in
a dream may be traced to multiple underlying causes. Reik (1948, pp. 2835) provides examples of overdetermination in a daydream protocol. A single
conversational utterance may be overdetermined in the sense that it achieves
several goals of the speaker simultaneously (Hobbs & D. A. Evans, 1980; P.
N. Johnson & Robertson, 1981). Sentences with double meanings are another
instance of overdetermination: In some contexts, an idiom may be employed
and understood in both its literal and figurative sense. Readers are able, for
example, to recognize both meanings of Kathy always lands on both feet in the
context of whether or not she will succeed at a risky parachute jump (R. A. G.

Mueller & Gibbs, 1987).
The psychoanalytic conception of overdetermination emphasizes unconscious
sources of behavior. In general, one may or may not be conscious of the various
elements which contributed to a given behavior. This section considers the possibility that the stream of consciousness might result from the merged products
of many processes, rather than from any single process as in DAYDREAMER.
We propose a basic model for the generation of overdetermined behavior, describe some associated problems and possible solutions, and present some initial
ideas toward a system for the overdetermined production of daydreams.

11.3.1

An Overdetermination

Mechanism

We propose a mechanism for the production of overdetermined behavior consisting of the following components: (a) a large collection of nonconscious, concurrent generative processes which provide the underlying source material for
behavior, and (b) a collection of nonconscious, concurrent merging processes
which produce the final behavior of the system through merging of the results
of several generative processes. Thus the only elements which rise to the conscious surface are those which are multiply determined—participants in several
nonconscious generative processes. (The term nonconscious is used to avoid

confusion with S. Freud’s [1900/1965] constructs of the “unconscious,” which

encompasses thoughts which have a high resistance to becoming conscious, and
the “preconscious,” which encompasses thoughts which can become conscious

at any moment.)
In one way, this model parallels Chomsky’s (1965) formulation of generative

11.3.

OVERDETERMINATION

OF DAYDREAMING

275

grammar: Generative processes correspond to the phrase structure grammar
which generates a deep structure; merging processes correspond to the transformations which map the deep structure into the surface structure; the surface structure corresponds to conscious elements. In other ways, however, it
is quite different: Chomsky does not postulate a large number of generative
processes. Therefore, there is not much opportunity for overdetermination on
a large scale. (A case, however, could be made for such a grammar introducing minor overdeterminations into the surface structure—one surface structure
element could very well correspond to more than one deep structure element.)
In addition, whereas the merging processes might introduce distortions or new
elements of meaning, transformations in Chomsky’s standard theory “cannot
introduce meaning-bearing elements ...” (p. 132)
What psychological evidence is there for nonconscious, semantic processing?
Habitual behaviors, such as driving to work, become automatic and hence performed with little or no conscious awareness (see, for example, Norman, 1982;
J. R. Anderson, 1983). There is some evidence for perception without awareness and the nonconscious priming of concepts (P6tzl, 1917/1960; Dixon, 1981;
Marcel, 1980). What are apparently conscious, voluntary behaviors may be
influenced by nonconscious factors: In experiments conducted by Libet (1985)
and colleagues, electrophysiological “readiness potentials” (negative shifts in
electric potential recorded on the scalp) were found to precede by 400 milliseconds the conscious intention to perform a spontaneous and voluntary motor act
(as measured by subjects’ recall of the position of a revolving spot upon the first
awareness of intention to act, and corrected by a control experiment involving
the timing of subjects’ reported awareness of skin stimuli). Libet concludes that
initiation of such acts begins nonconsciously.

11.3.2

Potential

Benefits

If an overdetermination mechanism could be made to work, it would provide solutions to two instances of the problem of elusiveness of concepts. First, overdetermination provides a potential solution to the cognitive modeler’s dilemma:
The processes and data entities hypothesized by the cognitive modeler to account for one or more human protocols are merely one set of processes and data
entities which might have resulted in those protocols. In fact, the modeler often discovers more than one potential model. While choices can often be made
in accordance with experimental data, theoretical assumptions, or principles of
parsimony, at other times the modeler is forced to make an arbitrary choice.
Within the limits of the given theoretical framework, overdetermination
would enable the modeler, when confronted with several possible sources of
a behavior, to incorporate each of those sources into the model. This does not
free the modeler, however, from: (a) finding each of these possible sources in

the first place, and (b) eventually showing that these sources are valid (either
that they have analogues in humans or that they are useful from an engineering

CHAPTER

276

11.

FUTURE

WORK AND CONCLUSIONS

or other standpoint).
Second, overdetermination provides a potential solution to the scaling problem in artificial intelligence programs: Once a given rule has been constructed,
the programmer will frequently discover exceptions which render that rule incorrect in certain situations (see, for example, Michalski & Winston, 1986).
Typically, the rule is then modified or the rule is discarded and a new rule is
constructed which operates properly. However, when the system consists of a
large number of rules, this process has a tendency to diverge: Whenever one
problem is fixed, other problems are created; it also becomes very difficult to add
further rules to the system without introducing new problems. (See the related
discussion by D. E. Smith, Genesereth, and Ginsberg, 1986, pp. 347-350.)
Overdetermination would enable many conflicting rules to exist simultaneously. Exceptions would be handled, not by modifying existing rules, but by
adding new rules. The behavior of the system in a given situation would be
defined not by the products of single rules, but by the merged products of many
rules. The rules would in effect vote on the final behavior. As a simple exam-

ple, if, in a particular situation, a rule of attitudinal congruity (Heider, 1958)
indicated a positive attitude toward some person while two defense mechanism

rules (A. Freud, 1937/1946) indicated a negative attitude toward that person,
the negative attitude would win out.
Overdetermination would thus enable the constructions of larger and more
complete systems, because the inconsistency problems associated with large
collections of rules in classical systems would no longer apply; it would no longer
be necessary to ensure that each rule is wholly correct. Overdetermination thus
adopts the “scruffy” approach to cognitive science (Abelson, 1981).

11.3.3.

Problems

for the Mechanism

There are many problems which arise in attempting to construct an overdetermination model of the stream of thought: If conscious sequences of imagined
events are overdetermined by several nonconscious sequences of events, then
how are those sequences of events merged together? Interlacing events from the
two sequences is not likely to result in a coherent sequence. Yet daydreams are

coherent.4 How are coherent and continuous merged sequences generated? If
two sequences are merged only if they are identical, there is the risk that two
processes would never happen to generate identical sequences of events and that
no conscious scenarios would ever be produced. If two sequences were merged
when they differed only in, say, the persons and physical objects involved, similar sequences might still be rare occurrences.
In general, it is difficult to merge two scenarios since those scenarios may
involve orthogonal world states. When the world states of scenarios do not clash
48. Freud (1900/1965) proposed a process of “secondary revision” to render the manifest
content of a dream more coherent and “like a day-dream.” (p. 530)

11.3.

OVERDETERMINATION

OF DAYDREAMING

277

entirely, how can they be reconciled? Merging might require alteration of one or
both of the event sequences. How much alteration is permitted? Freud’s dreamwork mechanisms, for‘example, permit a very distortive transformation from
nonconscious to conscious elements. The task of merging might be facilitated if
processes were allowed to interact as events were being generated.
How might emotions be modeled in an overdetermined processing scheme?
Are there nonconscious emotions? Emotional arousal (Schachter & J. E. Singer,
1962), at least, is associated with conscious thought. Need emotions be handled
any differently than other concepts?
One sometimes employs the technique of “counting sheep” in order to fall
asleep. An overdetermination mechanism has no executive process for guiding
the many nonconscious processes. How, then, does the “voluntary” or “directed”
aspect of the stream of consciousness arise? How is it that we can “consciously
direct” our thoughts? Overdetermination assumes that this aspect of thought
is an emergent property of the many nonconscious processes. It is not at all
clear how this property might be achieved. This problem presents an apparent
paradox: Conscious control arises out of nonconscious processes, and yet it
seems able to direct those very processes.
To what extent are the multiple causes of a behavior accessible to conscious-

ness? S. Freud (1901/1960) argues, for example, that slips of the tongue originate in repressed (unconscious) thoughts. On the other hand, the utterance in
which such a slip is embedded may have been consciously planned. Sometimes
one utters a sentence with full knowledge of a double meaning, while other times
one is not conscious of any second meaning. What beliefs do people have about
the causes of their own behavior? To what extent are these beliefs accurate?
If conscious elements are overdetermined by nonconscious elements, then
nonconscious elements might be underdetermined by conscious elements. (This
is not necessarily so: Multiple conscious elements might share single nonconscious elements.) That is, it may be difficult or impossible for the modeler to
figure out what the nonconscious elements are, given the conscious elements.°
Whenever more remote potential sources for a given behavior are found in addition to more direct sources, how does the modeler know whether these more
remote sources actually had any influence? Is it necessary to consider when the
influence comes or how much influence there is from a particular source?
If the stream of consciousness merely arises out of nonconscious processes,
then why is daydreaming—or the stream of consciousness—an interesting object
of study? Should we not be studying nonconscious processes instead? First, the
surface level of consciousness (as reported to others and as reflected in other
actions) corresponds to human behavior and that is a primary object of study
5 Even given further information, such as free associations, the nonconscious elements are
not fully determined and the interpreter can hypothesize arbitrary nonconscious elements to

suit the occasion.

This has been-one of the major criticisms of S. Freud’s (1900/1965) wish-

fulfillment theory of dreams (see, for example, Griinbaum,
pp. 45-46).

1984, pp. 235-239; Foulkes, 1978,

278

CHAPTER

11.

FUTURE

WORK AND CONCLUSIONS

in the field of artificial intelligence. Second, consciousness is a window into
nonconscious processes. By examining the results of nonconscious processes we
may be able to figure out what those nonconscious processes are.

11.3.4

Initial Solutions

We now present initial solutions to some of the problems described above. In
production systems (see, for example, Langley & Neches, 1981), conflicts are
resolved through techniques such as selecting rules whose antecedent concepts
have the highest activation, giving priority to more specific rules, and others.
In an overdetermination mechanism, however, conflicting rules are permitted to
fire. The outputs of those rules must then be merged into an appropriate result.
One way to merge identical concepts is to compile each new concept into
a discrimination net (Feigenbaum, 1963; Charniak, Riesbeck, & McDermott,
1980). Concepts are merged whenever a new concept is compiled into the same
location in the network as an existing concept. A number is associated with
each unique concept indicating its degree of determination, or the number of
times a concept was compiled into that location. Concepts with a degree of
determination above a certain threshold would be the conscious results of the

nonconscious processes.
In order to merge similar concepts, a simple similarity metric based on the
syntactic form of slot-filler objects and embedded objects could be used. This
would in fact be a general way of implementing the mechanism of “composition”
(S. Freud, 1900/1965) in which several persons are represented in the surface
content of a dream as a single person.
The content of daydreaming, however, is not single concepts but sequences of
events. In order to merge two event sequences, each intended to achieve a different goal, transformational rules or optimization techniques such as the “critics”
proposed by Sacerdoti (1977) could be employed. These transformations would
find and eliminate redundancies in a plan consisting of the simple composition
of the two plans (performing one sequence and then the other). For example,
if one plan is to go to the grocery store to get groceries, and the other is to go
to a newsstand to get a newspaper, the combined plan would consist of getting
both the groceries and newspaper at the grocery store, paying not twice but
once, and so on. Alternatively, transformations could be applied as the plans
are constructed, rather than afterwards.
Another event merging process is suggested by the serendipity detection
mechanism of DAYDREAMER: Whenever a subgoal of one plan under construction is recognized as applicable—directly or through the application of further
rules—to some subgoal of another plan under construction, those two plans may
be merged.
Some techniques have been developed for constructing overdetermined conversational utterances. The MAGPIE program (P. N. Johnson & Robertson,
1981) constructs utterances which achieve multiple goals as follows: An utter-

11.3.

OVERDETERMINATION

OF DAYDREAMING

279

ance is produced to achieve the first goal; the remaining goals are then achieved
through incremental modification of the utterance. For example, MAGPIE models the generation of an utterance by a wife who has three goals: to obtain
information about her husband’s location the previous night, to express anger
toward her husband, and to regain control over the relationship. Depending on
the ordering of goals, the system is able to generate “Damn you, you were out
too late last night. Where were you?” and “You were out so late last night,
why?” (Anger, for example, is expressed in the former via the initial utterance
“Damn you!” and in the latter through modification of the existing question
utterance in order to emphasize the source of anger.) Hobbs and D. A. Evans
(1980) suggest a similar approach in which goals compete to fill in “slots” of an
utterance; material may be added to a given slot provided that (a) a stronger

goal has not already filled that slot, and (b) the material is suitable given the
contents of other slots.

11.3.5

DAYDREAMER*

One possible future direction for research is to construct a system for the overdetermined production of daydreams, called DAYDREAMER*.
To handle the
large number of independent processes, DAYDREAMER* would ideally be implemented on a massively parallel machine. In addition, several components
of the current version of DAYDREAMER are suited to parallel implementation:
The rule intersection search performed by the serendipity mechanism and investigation of alternative possibilities resulting from generic rules and episodes.
Instead of the stream of consciousness resulting from a shifting of processing
from concern to concern, as in DAYDREAMER, the stream of consciousness in
DAYDREAMER* would result from the merged results of processing on behalf
of multiple concerns. Specifically, concerns would start out as independent processes executing simultaneously.® Then two processes would be merged upon
detection of applicability of a combining transformation, upon detection of a
common subgoal, or upon detection of potentially common subgoal (as in the
serendipity mechanism of DAYDREAMER). This process could be applied repeatedly, resulting in the merging of what were once three or more independent
processes. Processes would split again if the merged process was unable to
achieve all (or some percentage) of its concern goals (or those processes would

simply terminate).
Furthermore, why limit daydreaming on behalf of a given concern to a single
event stream at atime? While alternative plans for achieving a given subgoal are
investigated in serial order in DAYDREAMER, n alternative plans would result
in a process being split into n parallel processes in DAYDREAMER*. Thus many
alternative processes for each concern would be subject to merging with many
processes for other concerns.
®This discussion applies only to daydreaming goal concerns. Personal goal concerns would
be carried out in a single process corresponding to the simulated real world.

280

CHAPTER

11.

FUTURE

WORK AND CONCLUSIONS

Figure 11.1: Overdetermined Stream of Consciousness

Processing in DAYDREAMER* can thus be viewed as a continuous activity
of process splitting and merging. How is the stream of consciousness extracted
from this activity? Perhaps it could be based on a “good” or “best” path
through the sequence of merged processes. Figure 11.1 shows on a small scale
what this might look like. (These mechanisms could be implemented on a serial
system, but at a much slower rate.) Mechanisms for the “voting” of multiple conflicting planning and inference rules, and for pruning many possibilities
(especially those generated through relaxed unification), will also have to be
devised. It will be interesting to see to what degree the stream of consciousness
resulting from such a system resembles the human stream of consciousness.

11.3.6

Relationship to Previous Work

J. L. Singer (1974, pp. 247-248) has previously proposed that daydreaming
makes use of active long-term memory processes which take place just outside
our awareness. Minsky (1977, 1981) has proposed a “society of mind” theory in
which the mind is composed of many communicating and sometimes conflicting
agents; in this theory, also, self-awareness or consciousness arises out of the complex pattern of agents rather than being contained in any one executive agent.
A related idea is Hewitt’s (1977) model in which computations are performed
by agents called “actors” which send and receive messages to and from other
actors and create new ones.

Several holistic connectionist researchers have proposed. to model human intelligence using large networks inspired by the physiology of the brain (Rumelhart et al., 1986; Hofstadter, 1983; J. A. Feldman & Ballard, 1982; Hinton & J.
A. Anderson, 1981). Connectionist networks provide a natural implementation
for overdetermined behavior, since, as Norman (1986, p. 546) points out, there
is no one reason for any given state of such a network; any state results from a
conjunction of many factors. However, at present, connectionist networks lack
an ability which is fundamental to daydream construction: The ability to in-

11.3.

OVERDETERMINATION

OF DAYDREAMING

281

stantiate and combine concepts. The problem is that a concept is represented in
a connectionist network as a stable pattern of activation of the nodes in the net.
As a result, only one concept can be represented at a time by a single network
(Rumelhart, Smolensky, McClelland, & Hinton, 1986, p. 38), making it difficult
to combine several concepts into a new one. Some researchers have therefore
proposed keeping several connected copies of a network, one for each concept

(Hinton, 1981).

What is instead needed is some way, in a single network, to

compose together previous substates of the network to form a new state. Minsky

(1981) provides a suggestion as to how this might be accomplished via his mechanism of “K-lines” and the “K-recursion principle.” Otherwise, the problem of
constructing network architectures becomes equivalent to the problem of representing concepts by conventional, knowledge-level means.’ We look forward to
future experimentation with connectionist systems.
How does the view of overdetermined processing presented here compare

to (nonholistic) spreading activation architectures for cognition such as that
proposed by J. R. Anderson (1983)? Such an architecture consists of nodes
connected by links, a process for spreading an analog level of activation from
one node to connected nodes, and production rules which operate only on nodes
above a certain level of activation.
If it is assumed that nodes above a certain threshold level of activation are
conscious,® then this mechanism can describe the production of a conscious
result by several nonconscious sources: Nodes whose activation is below the
threshold of consciousness may spread activation to a node causing its level
to rise above the threshold of consciousness. However, nonconscious processing in addition to this automatic process of spreading activation could not be
described, because production rules may only access conscious nodes.
Alternatively, one threshold could be equated with consciousness, while another, lower, threshold could be used to determine whether processing might
occur for a given node. This would enable modeling of nonconscious processing as well as the production of overdetermined elements. However, this would
not enable overdetermination on a massive scale: Because activation level is
intended to model the limited capacity of human short-term memory (Miller,
1956), only a relatively small number of nodes are permitted to be active, and
accessible to processing, at any time. While in a spreading activation architecture only a small portion of the network is involved in processing, massive
overdetermination requires that a large component of the network be involved
in processing.
Thus in contrast to the view of spreading activation architectures that processing occurs only on short-term memory elements, overdetermination takes
the view that processing occurs on many elements not present in short-term
In fact, overdetermination suggests that short-term memory (and
memory.
7See Chapter 10 for a more detailed discussion of this point.
8 Although J. R. Anderson (1983) equates nodes above a certain activation level with human
short-term memory, he does not assume such nodes correspond to consciousness (note, p. 309).

CHAPTER

282

11.

FUTURE

WORK AND CONCLUSIONS

consciousness) may arise out of a large number of nonconscious processes.
remains to be determined whether and how this might be the case.

11.4

Was

It Worth

It

It?

Why was such a large problem as daydreaming chosen? Why was not a small,
circumscribed topic instead chosen? There are several advantages to taking on
a large problem: One is less likely to form a peephole view of things. One can
integrate what were once seen as different problems. Work on one component
often leads to progress on other components.
For example, at the time the
serendipity mechanism in DAYDREAMER was first designed, two other mechanisms were being used to recognize the applicability of input states to an active
concern and to recognize the utility of an mutated action. It was then realized
that the serendipity mechanism could accomplish both of these tasks. Similarly,
the analogical planning mechanism has proved far more useful and general than
was originally expected: It, for example, is used equally for carrying out previously daydreamed plans in the simulated real world, for generating daydream
scenarios from past experiences, and for fleshing out a serendipity. If any one
of the components of daydreaming had been studied alone, its relationship to
other components might never have been noticed.
Taking on a large problem has its disadvantages as well: There is the danger
of one’s energy being spread too thin on too many problems; it is easy to
become overwhelmed with the magnitude of the task; one might be so intent
on doing everything that one ends up doing nothing. But any true artificial
intelligence problem is by its very nature a large problem: How can we study
natural language independently of other aspects of cognition? The same could
be said for vision, problem solving, creativity, and so on. Daydreaming is but
one more AJ-complete problem: If we could solve any one artificial intelligence
problem, we could solve all the others. We can benefit in the future from both
comprehensive and more restricted approaches to these problems.
Despite its limitations, DAYDREAMER provides an explicit, running model
of the seemingly elusive, but pervasive, phenomenon of daydreaming. The program demonstrates how the generation of various creative past, present, and
future events enables beneficial modification of future behavior. Daydreaming
is a useful capability for any computer system, and a necessary capability for a
truly intelligent one.

REFERENCES

283

References
Abelson, R. P. (1963). Computer simulation of “hot” cognition. In S. S. Tomkins &
S. Messick (Eds.), Computer simulation of personality. New York: Wiley.
Abelson, R. P. (1981). Constraint, construal, and cognitive science. In Proceedings
of the Third Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1-9), Berkeley,
CA.
Adams, J. L. (1974). Conceptual blockbusting: A guide to better ideas. New York: W.
W. Norton.

Anderson,

J. R. (1983).

The architecture of cognition.

Cambridge,

MA: Harvard

University Press.

Antrobus, J. S. (1977). The dream as metaphor: An information-processing
learning model. Journal of Mental Imagery, 2, 327-337.

and

Antrobus, J. S., & Singer, J. L. (1964). Visual signal detection as a function of
sequential variability of simultaneous speech. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 68,
603-610.
Antrobus,

J. S., Singer, J. L., & Greenberg,

S. (1966).

Studies in the stream of

consciousness: Experimental enhancement and suppression of spontaneous cognitive
process. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 23, 399-417.

Arnheim, R. (1974). Art and visual perception: A psychology of the creative eye (the
new version). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Asimov, I. (1963). The human brain: Its capacities and functions. New York: Signet.
Barber, G. (1983).

Supporting organizational problem solving with a work station.

ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems, 1(1), 45-67.
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering: A study in experimental and social psychology.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Baylor, G. W., & Deslauriers, D. (1986). Dreams as problem solving: A method of
study—Part I: Background and theory. Imagination, Cognition, and Personality, 6(2),
105-118.

Beare, J. I. (1931). De memoria et reminiscentia. In W. D. Ross (Ed.), The works of
Aristotle (vol. 3). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Beck, A. (1967). Depression:
York: Harper & Row.

Clinical,

experimental,

and theoretical aspects.

New

Ben-Aaron, M. (1975). The Poetzel effect: Corroboration of a cybernetic hypothesis.
In R. Trappl & F. Pichler (Eds.), Progress in cybernetics and systems research (Vol.
1, pp. 247-252). Washington, DC: Hemisphere Publishing.
Bexton, W. H., Heron, W., & Scott, T. H. (1954). Effects of decreased variation in
the sensory environment. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 8(2), 70-76.

Bleuler, E. (1951). Autistic thinking. In D. Rapaport (Ed.), Organization and pathology of thought. New York: Columbia University Press. (Original work published

1912).

REFERENCES

284

Bloch, G. (1985).

Body and self: Elements of human biology, behavior, and health.

Los Altos, CA: William Kaufmann.

Bower, G. H., & Cohen, P. R. (1982). Emotional influences in memory and thinking:
Data and theory. In M. S. Clark & S. T. Fiske (Eds.), Affect and cognition: The 17th
Annual Carnegie Symposium on Cognition. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bower, G. H., Monteiro, K. P., & Gilligan, S. G. (1978). Emotional mood as a context
for learning and recall. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 17, 573-585.
Breuer, J., & Freud, S. (1937). Studies in hysteria.

Boston:

Beacon.

(Original work

published 1895)
Bundy, A., Silver, B., & Plummer, D. (1985). An analytical comparison of some
rule-learning programs. Artificial Intelligence, 27, 137-181.

Cannon, W. B. (1927). The James-Lange theory of emotions: A critical examination
and an alternative theory. American Journal of Psychology, 39, 106-124.
Carbonell, J. (1980). Towards a process model of human personality traits. Artificial
Intelligence, 15, 49-74.

Carbonell, J. G. (1983). Learning by analogy: Formulating and generalizing plans
from past experience. In R. S. Michalski, J. G. Carbonell, & T. M. Mitchell (Eds.),
Machine learning (pp. 137-161). Palo Alto, CA: Tioga.

Charniak, E. (1983a). Passing markers: A theory of contextual influence in language
comprehension. Cognitive Science, 7, 171-190.
Charniak, E. (1983b). The Bayesian basis of common-sense medical diagnosis. In
Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 70-73). Los
Altos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Charniak, E., & McDermott, D. V. (1985).
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Introduction

to artificial intelligence.

Charniak, E., Riesbeck, C. K., & McDermott, D. V. (1980).
programming. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Artificial intelligence

Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the theory of syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Churchland, P. M. (1984). Matter and consciousness: A contemporary introduction to
the philosophy of mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Clark, M. S., & Isen, A. M. (1982). Toward understanding the relationship between
feeling states and social behavior. In A. Hastorf & A. M. Isen (Eds.), Cognitive social
psychology. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Clocksin, W. F., & Mellish, C. S. (1981).
Verlag.
Cohen, H., Cohen, B., & Nii, P. (1984).
Los Altos, CA: William Kaufmann.

Programming in Prolog.

Berlin: Springer-

The first artificial intelligence coloring book.

Colby, K. M. (1963) Computer simulation of a neurotic process: In S. S. Tomkins &
S. Messick (Eds.), Computer simulation of personality. New York: Wiley.

Colby, K. M. (1973). Simulations of belief systems. In R. C. Schank & K. M. Colby
(Eds.), Computer models of thought and language. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.

REFERENCES

285

Colby, K. M. (1975). Artificial paranoia: A computer simulation of paranoid processes.
New York: Pergamon Press.

Colby, K. M. (1981). Modeling a paranoid mind.

The Behavioral and Brain Sciences,

4(4), 515-560.

Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreading activation theory of semantic
processing. Psychological Review, 82, 407-428.

Cope, D. H. (1976).

New directions in music (2nd Edition).

Dubuque, IA: Wm.

C.

Brown.

Copland, A. (1980).

Music and imagination.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University

Press.

Crook, J. H. (1983). On attributing consciousness to animals. Nature, 303(5), 11-14.
Cundiff, G., & Gold, S. R. (1979). Daydreaming:

and Motor Skills, 49, 347-353.

A measurable concept.

Perceptual

Dallin, L. (1974). Techniques of twentieth century composition: A guide to the materials of modern music (3rd Edition). Dubuque, IA: Wm. C. Brown.

Darwin, C. (1872). The expression of the emotions in man and animals.
University of Chicago Press.

Chicago:

de Bono, E. (1970).
Row.

Harper &

Lateral thinking:

Creativity step by step. New York:

DeJong, G. (1981). Generalizations based on explanations. In Proceedings of the
Seventh International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 67-69). Los
Altos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Dement, W. C. (1976). Some must watch while some must sleep. San Francisco:
Francisco Book Company.

San

Dement, W., & Kleitman, N. (1957). Cyclic variations in EEG during sleep and their
relation to eye movements, body motility, and dreaming. Electroencephalography and
Clinical Neurophysiology, 9, 673-690.
DeMillo, R. A., Lipton, R. J., & Perlis, A. J. (1978). Social processes and proofs of
theorems and programs (Revised version, GIT-ICS-78/04). Atlanta: Georgia Institute
of Technology.
Dennett, D. C. (1978). Brainstorms.

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Dennett, D. C. (1984). Elbow room:
bridge, MA: MIT Press.

The varieties of free will worth wanting.

Desoille, R. (1966).
Foundation.

The directed daydream.

New York:

Cam-

Psychosynthesis Research

Dietterich, T. G., & Michalski, R. S. (1983). A comparative review of selected methods
for learning from examples. In R. S. Michalski, J. G. Carbonell, & T. M. Mitchell
(Eds.), Machine learning (pp. 41-81). Palo Alto, CA: Tioga.

Dixon, N. F. (1981). Preconscious processing. New York: Wiley.

REFERENCES

286

Doyle, J. (1980). A model for deliberation, action, and introspection (‘Technical Report
581). Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory.
Duda, R. O., Hart, P. E., and Nilsson, N. J. (1976). Subjective Bayesian methods for
rule-based inference systems. In Proceedings of the 1976 National Computer Conference. Montvale, NJ: AFIPS Press.

Dyer, M. G. (1983a). In-depth understanding. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dyer, M. G. (1983b). The role of affect in narratives.

Cognitive Science, 7, 211-242.

Dyer, M. G. (1983c). Understanding stories through morals and remindings. In Proceedings of the Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
Altos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1984).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Protocol analysis:

Los

Verbal reports as data.

Ernst, G., & Newell, A. (1969). GPS: A case study in generality and problem solving.
New York: Academic Press.
Evans, C. (1983). Landscapes of the night: How and why we dream. New York: Viking.

Evans, C. R., & Newman, E. A. (1964). Dreaming: An analogy from computers. New
Scientist, 419, 577-579.

Faletti, J. (1982). PANDORA—A program for doing commonsense planning in complex situations. In Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(pp. 185-188). Los Altos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Farrell, B. A. (1950). Experience.

Mind, 54, 170-198.

Feigenbaum, E. A. (1963). Simulation of verbal learning behavior. In E. A. Feigenbaum & J. Feldman (Eds.), Computers and thought. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Feigenbaum, E. A., & Feldman, J. (Eds.). (1963). Computers and thought. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Feigenbaum, E. A., & Simon, H. A. (1984).
Learning. Cognitive Science, 8, 305-336.

EPAM-like Models of Recognition and

Feldman, J. A., & Ballard, D. H. (1982). Connectionist models and their properties.
Cognitive Science, 6, 205-254.
Feshbach, S. (1956). The catharsis hypothesis and some consequences of interaction
with aggressive and neutral play objects. Journal of Personality, 24, 449-462.

Festinger, L. (1957).
versity Press.

A theory of cognitive dissonance.

Stanford, CA: Stanford Uni-

Fikes, R. E., Hart, P. E., & Nilsson, N. J. (1972). Learning and executing generalized
robot plans. Artificial Intelligence, 3, 251-288.

Fikes, R. E., & Nilsson, N. J. (1971). STRIPS: A new approach to the application of
theorem proving to problem solving. Artificial Intelligence, 2, 189-208.

Flavell, J. H. (1979). Metacognition and cognitive monitoring: A new area of cognitive
developmental inquiry. American Psychologist, 34, 906-911.

Fodor, J. (1981). The mind-body problem. Scientific American, 244, 114-123.

REFERENCES

287

Foulkes, D. (1966). The psychology of sleep. New York: Scribner’s.

Foulkes, D. (1978). A grammar of dreams. New York: Basic Books.
Foulkes, D. (1985).
Lawrence Erlbaum.

Dreaming:

A cognitive-psychological

analysis.

Hillsdale,

Foulkes, D., & Fleisher, S. (1975). Mental activity in relaxed wakefulness.
Abnormal Psychology, 84, 66-75.

NJ:

Journal of

French, T. M. (1952). The integration of behavior, volume I: Basic postulates. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
French, T. M. (1953). The integration of behavior, volume II: The integrative process
in dreams. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Freud, A. (1946).

The ego and the mechanisms

of defence.

New York: International

Universities Press. (Original work published 1937)
Freud, S. (1936). The problem of anxiety. New York: W. W. Norton. (Original work
published 1926)
Freud, S. (1960). The psychopathology of everyday life. New York:
(Original work published 1901).

W. W. Norton.

Freud, S. (1961). Beyond the pleasure principle. New York: W. W. Norton.

(Original

work published 1920)
Freud, S. (1962). Creative writers and day-dreaming. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.),
The standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud (Vol. 9).
London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1908)
Freud, S. (1965).
published 1900)

The interpretation of dreams.

New York:

Avon.

(Original work

Friday, N. (1973). My secret garden. New York: Pocket Books.

Gackenbach, J. I. (1985). A survey of considerations for inducing conscious awareness
of dreaming while dreaming. Imagination, Cognition, and Personality, 5(1), 41-55.
Garfield, P. (1974). Creative dreaming. New York: Ballantine.
Giambra, L. M. (1977). Adult male daydreaming across the life span: A replication,
further analyses, and tentative norms based upon retrospective reports. International
Journal of Aging and Human Development, 8(3), 197-228.

Giambra, L. M. (1980). A factor analysis of the items of the Imaginal Processes
Inventory. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 36, 383-409.
Gibbs, R. W., & Mueller, R. A. G. (1988). Conversational sequences and preference
for indirect speech acts. Discourse Processes, 11, 101-116.
The presentation of self in everyday life.

Garden City, NY:

Goldman, N. (1975). Conceptual generation. In R. C. Schank
information processing. New York: American Elsevier.

(Ed.), Conceptual

Unpublished report.

Marina del Rey,

Goffman, E. (1959).
Doubleday.

Goldman, N. (1982). AP? reference manual.
CA: USC/Information Sciences Institute.

REFERENCES

288

Gouaux, C. (1971). Induced affective states and interpersonal attraction.
Personality and Social Psychology, 20, 37-43.

Journal of

Green, C. E. (1968). Lucid dreams. Oxford: Institute of Psychophysical Research.
Green, G. H. (1923). The daydream: A study in development. London: University of
London Press.

Griffin, D. R. (1981). The question of animal awareness (Revised and Enlarged Edition). Los Altos, CA: William Kaufmann.
Grossberg, S. (1976). Adaptive pattern classification and universal recoding: Part I.
Parallel development and coding of neural feature detectors. Biological Cybernetics,
28, 121-134.
Griinbaum, A. (1984). The foundations of psychoanalysis:
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

A philosophical critique.

Guilford, J. P. (1967). The nature of human inteliigence. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Hariton, E. B., & Singer, J. L. (1974). Women’s fantasies during sexual intercourse:
Normative and theoretical implications. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 42, 313-322.

Hayes-Roth, B., & Hayes-Roth, F. (1979). A cognitive model of planning.
Science, 3(4), 275-310.
Heider, F. (1958).
Erlbaum.

Cognitive

The psychology of interpersonal relations. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence

Heiser, J. F., Colby, K. M., Faught, W. S., & Parkison, R. C. (1980). Can psychiatrists
distinguish a computer simulation of paranoia from the real thing? The limitations
of Turing-like tests as measures of the adequacy of simulation. Journal of Psychiatric
Research, 15, 149-162.
Hewitt, C. (1975). How to use what you know.

Advance papers of the Fourth Inter-

national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (Vol. 1). Los Altos, CA: Morgan
Kaufmann.

Hewitt, C. (1977). Viewing control structures as patterns of passing messages.
ficial Intelligence, 8(3), 323-364.
Hiller, L. (1984). The composer and the computer.
Hiller, L. A., & Isaacson, L. M. (1959).
wood Press.

Arti-

Abacus, 1(4), 9-31.

Experimental music.

Westport, CT: Green-

Hillis, W. D. (1985). The connection machine. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hinton, G. E. (1981). Implementing semantic networks in parallel hardware.

In G. E.

Hinton & J. A. Anderson (Eds.), Parallel models of associative memory (pp. 161-188).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Hinton, G. E., & Anderson,
memory.

J. A. (Eds.).

(1981).

Parallel models of associative

Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Hinton, G. E., McClelland, J. L., & Rumelhart, D. E. (1986). Distributed representa-

tions. In D. E. Rumelhart, J. L. McClelland, & PDP Research Group (Eds.), Parallel
distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure
Foundations (pp. 77-109). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

of cognition.

Volume

1:

REFERENCES

Hobbes, T. (1968).
published 1651)

289
Leviathan.

Harmondsworth, England:

Hobbs, J. R., & Evans, D. A. (1980).
Science, 4, 349-377.

Penguin.

(Original work

Conversation as planned behavior.

Hofstadter, D. R. (1983). The architecture of jumbo.
Machine Learning Workshop, Urbana, IL.

Hofstadter, D. R. (1985). Metamagical themas:
pattern. New York: Basic Books.
Hofstadter, D. R., & Dennett, D. C. (1981).
on self and soul. Toronto: Bantam.

Cognitive

In Proceedings of the Second

Questing for the essence of mind and

The mind’s I: Fantasies and reflections

Housman, A. E. (1952). The name and nature of poetry. In B. Ghiselin (Ed.), The
creative process. New York: Mentor.

Huba, G. J., Segal, B., & Singer, J. L. (1977). Consistency of daydreaming styles
across samples of college male and female drug and alcohol users. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 86, 99-102.

Izard, C. E. (1977). Human emotions. New York: Plenum.
Jakobson, R. (1978). Six lectures on sound and meaning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
James, W. (1890a).

The principles of psychology (Vol. 1). New York: Dover.

James, W. (1890b).

The principles of psychology (Vol. 2). New York: Dover.

Janis, I., & Mann L. (1977). Decision-making. New York: Free Press.
Johnson, M. K., & Raye, C. L. (1981).
88(1), 67-85.

Reality monitoring.

Psychological Review,

Johnson, P. N., & Robertson, S. P. (1981). MAGPIE: A goal-based model of conversation (Research Report 206). New Haven, CT: Yale University, Computer Science
Department.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models: Towards a cognitive science of language,
inference, and consciousness. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Jones, E. (1908). Rationalisation in everyday life.
Psychology, 3, 161-169.

Jung, C. (1916). Psychology of the unconscious.
pany.

Journal of Abnormal and Social

New York: Dodd, Mead, and Com-

Kahn, K. M. (1978). Director guide (AI Memo 482). Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1982). The simulation heuristic. In D. Kahneman, P.
Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. New
York: Cambridge University Press.

Kedar-Cabelli, S. T. (1985). Purpose-directed analogy. In The Seventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 150-159), Irvine, CA.

Kelley, H. H. (1967).

Attribution theory in social psychology..

In D. Levin (Ed.),

Nebraska Symposium on Motivation. Lincoln, NB: University of Nebraska Press.

REFERENCES

290

Kernighan, B. W., & Plauger, P. J. (1976).
Wesley.

Software tools. Reading, MA: Addison-

Planning techniques for rule selection in deductive questionKlahr, P. (1978).
answering. In D. A. Waterman & F. Hayes-Roth (Eds.), Pattern-directed inference
systems (pp. 223-239). New York: Academic Press.

Klinger, E. (1971). The structure and function of fantasy. New York: John Wiley.
Klinger, E. (1978). Modes of normal conscious flow. In K. S. Pope & J. L. Singer
(Eds.), The stream of consciousness. New York: Plenum.

Koestler, A. (1964). The act of creation: A study of the conscious and unconscious in
science and art. New York: Macmillan.
Kolodner, J. L. (1984). Retrieval and organizational strategies in conceptual memory:
A computer model. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Kolodner, J. L., Simpson, R. L., & Sycara-Cyranski, K. (1985). A process model of
cased-based reasoning in problem solving. In Proceedings of the Ninth International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 284-290). Los Altos, CA: Morgan
Kaufmann.

Kornfeld, W. A., & Hewitt, C. (1981). The scientific community metaphor.
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, SMC-11(1).

[EEE

Kowalski, R. (1975). A proof procedure using connection graphs. Journal of the
22, 572-595.

ACM,

Kris, E. (1952). Psychoanalytic explorations in art. New York: International Universities Press.

Kugel, P. (1986). Thinking may be more than computing.

Cognition, 22, 137-198.

LaBerge, S. (1985) Lucid dreaming: The power of being awake
dreams. Los Angeles: Jeremy P. Tarchner.

and aware

in your

Laird, J. BE. (1984). Universal subgoaling. Doctoral dissertation, Department of Computer Science, Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.
Langley, P., Bradshaw, G. L., & Simon, H. A. (1983). Rediscovering chemistry with

the Bacon system. In R. S. Michalski, J. G. Carbonell, & T. M. Mitchell (Eds.),
Machine learning (pp. 307-329). Palo Alto, CA: Tioga.
Langley, P., & Neches, R. (1981).

PRISM user’s manual (Technical report).

Pitts-

burgh, PA: Carnegie-Mellon University, Department of Psychology.
Lazarus, R. S. (1968). Emotions and adaptation: Conceptual and empirical relations.
In W. J. Arnold (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation. Lincoln, NB: University
of Nebraska.

Leavitt, R. (1976). Artist and computer. New York: Harmony Books.

Lebowitz, M. (1980). Generalization and memory in an integrated understanding system (Research Report 186). New Haven, CT: Yale University, Computer Science
Department.

Lehnert, W. G. (1982). Plot units: A narrative summarization strategy. In W. G.
Lehnert & M. H. Ringle (Eds.), Strategies for natural language processing. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

REFERENCES

291

Lenat, D. B. (1976). AM: An artificial intelligence approach to discovery in mathematics as heuristic search (Report No. STAN-CS-76-570). Stanford, CA: Stanford
University, Computer Science Department.
Lenat, D. B. (1983). The role of heuristics in learning by discovery: Three case studies.
In R. S. Michalski, J. G. Carbonell, & T. M. Mitchell (Eds.), Machine learning (pp.
243-306). Palo Alto, CA: Tioga.

Lenat, D. B., & Brown, J. S. (1984).
Artificial Intelligence, 23(3), 269-294.

Why

Leuner, H. (1969). Guided affective imagery:
American Journal of Psychotherapy, 23, 4-22.

AM

and EURISKO

appear to work.

A method of intensive psychotherapy.

Lewin, K. (1951). Intention, will and need. In D. Rapaport (Ed.), Organization and
pathology of thought. New York: Columbia University Press. (Original work published

1926).

Lewis, H. R., & Papadimitriou, C. H. (1981). Elements of the theory of computation.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Libet, B. (1985). Unconscious cerebral initiative and the role of conscious will in
voluntary action. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 8, 529-566.
Linton, M. (1982). Transformations of memory in everyday life. In U. Neisser (Ed.),
Memory observed: Remembering in natural contexts. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Loeb, A., Beck, A. T., & Diggory, J. (1971). Differential effects of success and failure
on depressed and nondepressed patients. The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
152, 106-114.

Loftus, E. F. (1975). Leading questions and the eyewitness report. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 560-572.

Luthe, W. (1969). Autogenic training: Method, research, and application in medicine.
In C. T. Tart (Ed.), Altered states of consciousness. New York: John Wiley.

Mandler, G. (1975). Mind and emotion. New York: John Wiley.
Marcel, A. J. (1980). Conscious and preconscious recognition of polysemous words:
Locating the selective effect of prior verbal context. In R. S. Nickerson (Ed.), Attention
and performance (vol. 8). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Maslow, A. H. (1954). Motivation and personality (2nd Edition). New York: Harper
& Row.
Maury, L. F. A. (1878). Le sommeil et les réves. Paris: Didier.
McCarthy, J., Abrahams, P. W., Edwards, D. J., Hart, T. P., & Levin, M. I. (1965).
LISP 1.5 programmer’s manual. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

McCarthy, J., & Hayes, P. J. (1969). Some philosophical problems from the standpoint
of artificial intelligence. In B. Meltzer & D. Michie (Eds.), Machine intelligence 4 (pp.
463-502). Edinburgh, Scotland: Edinburgh Univeristy Press.
McClelland, J. L. (1986). The programmable blackboard model of reading. In J. L.
McClelland, D. E. Rumelhart, & PDP Research Group (Eds.), Parallel distributed
processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition. Volume 2: Psychological
and biological models (pp. 122-169). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

REFERENCES

292

McClelland, J. L., & Rumelhart, D. E. (1986). A distributed model of human learning and memory. In J. L. McClelland, D. E. Rumelhart, & PDP Research Group
(Eds.), Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition.
Volume 2: Psychological and biological models (pp. 170-215). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
McClelland, J. L., Rumelhart, D. E., & Hinton, G. E. (1986). The appeal of parallel
distributed processing. In D. E. Rumelhart, J. L. McClelland, & PDP Research Group
(Eds.), Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition.
Volume 1: Foundations (pp. 3-44). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

McClelland, J. L., Rumelhart, D. E., & PDP Research Group (Eds.). (1986). Parallel
distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition.
Psychological and biological models. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Volume

2:

McDermott, D. V. (1976). Artificial intelligence meets natural stupidity.
Newsletter, 57.
New York: Association for Computing Machinery.

SIGART

McDougall, W. (1923). Outline of psychology. New York: Scribner’s.

McKellar, P. (1957). Imagination and thinking: A psychological analysis. New York:
Basic Books.

McNeil, J. (1981). [Daydream diaries (retrospective reports) collected from subjects].
Unpublished raw data.
McNeil, J. (1985). Interpersonal problem resolution in narrated imagery and verbal
thought. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Department of Psychology, University of

California, Los Angeles.
Meacham, J. A., & Leiman, B. (1982) Remembering to perform future actions. In
U. Neisser (Ed.), Memory observed: Remembering in natural contexts. San Francisco:
W. H. Freeman.

Mednick, S. (1962). The associative basis of the creative process. Psychological Review,
69, 220-232.

Meehan, J. (1976). The metanovel: Writing stories by computer (Research Report
74). New Haven, CT: Yale University, Computer Science Department.
Metz, C. (1982). The imaginary signifier. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.

Meyer, L. B. (1956). Emotion and meaning in music. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Michalski, R. S., & Winston, P. H. (1986).

Variable precision logic. Artificial Intelli-

gence, 29, 121-146.

Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on
our capacity for processing information. Psychological Review, 63, 81-97.
Miller, G. A., Galanter, E., & Pribram, K. H. (1960).
behavior. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.

Plans and the structure

of

Minsky, M. (1968). Descriptive languages and problem solving. ‘In M. Minsky (Ed.),
Semantic information processing (pp. 419-424). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Minsky, M. (1975). A framework for representing knowledge. In P. H. Winston (Ed.),
The psychology of computer vision. New York: McGraw-Hill.

REFERENCES

293

Minsky, M. L. (1977). Plain talk about neurodevelopmental epistemology. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 10831092). Los Altos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.

Minsky, M. L. (1981). K-lines: A theory of memory. In D. A. Norman (Ed.), Perspectives on cognitive science (pp. 87-104). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Mischel, W. (1979). On the interface of cognition and personality: Beyond the personsituation debate. American Psychologist, 34, 740-754.

Mitchell, T. M., Kellar, R. M., & Kedar-Cabelli, S. T. (1986).
generalization: A unifying view. Machine Learning, 1, 47-80.

Explanation-based

Moser, U., Pfeifer, R., Schneider, W., Von Zeppelin, I., & Schneider, H. (1980). Computer simulation of dream processes (Technical Report 6). Ziirich: Soziologisches Institut der Universitat Zurich, Interdisziplinaren Konfliktforschungsstelle.
Moser, U., Pfeifer, R., Schneider, W., Von Zeppelin, I., & Schneider, H. (1982). Experiences with computer simulation of dream processes. Sleep 1982: 6th European
Congress on Sleep Research (pp. 30-44). Basel, Switzerland: S. Karger.
Moss, J. E. B. (1981). Nested transactions: An approach to reliable distributed computing (Technical Report 260). Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Laboratory for Computer Science.

Mostow, D. J. (1981). Mechanical transformation of task heuristics into operational
procedures.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Department of Computer Science,
Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.

Mostow, J. (1983). Program transformations for VLSI. In Proceedings of the Eighth
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 40-43). Los Altos, CA:
Morgan Kaufmann.

Mueller, E. T. (1983). Implementation of nested transactions in a distributed system (Technical Report CSD-831115). (Master’s thesis). Los Angeles: University of
California, Computer Science Department.

Mueller, E. T. (1987a). GATE user’s manual (2nd edition, Technical Report UCLAAI-87-6). Los Angeles: University of California, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
Mueller, E. T. (1987b). Daydreaming and computation: A computer model of everyday
creativity, learning, and emotions in the human stream of thought (Technical Report
UCLA-AI-87-8). Doctoral dissertation, Computer Science Department, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA.

Mueller, E. T., Moore, J. D., & Popek, G. J. (1983). A nested transaction mechanism for LOCUS. In Proceedings of the Ninth ACM Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles (pp. 71-89). New York: Association for Computing Machinery.

Mueller, E. T., & Zernik, U. (1984). GATE reference manual (Technical Report
UCLA-AI-84-5). Los Angeles: University of California, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.

Mueller, E. T., & Dyer, M. G. (1985a). Towards a computational theory of human
daydreaming. In The Seventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
120-129), Irvine, CA.

REFERENCES

294

Mueller, E. T., & Dyer, M. G. (1985b). Daydreaming in humans and computers. In
Proceedings of the Ninth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp.
278-280). Los Altos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Mueller, R. A. G., & Gibbs, R. W. (1987). Processing idioms with multiple meanings.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 16(1), 63-81.

Mueller, R. E. (1963).
John Day.

Inventivity:

How man creates in art and science.

New York:

Mueller, R. E. (1967).
New York: John Day.

The science of art: The cybernetics of creative communication.

Mueller, R. E. (1983, January). When is Computer Art Art? Creative Computing, pp.
136-144.

Nagel, T. (1974). What is it like to be a bat? Philosophical Review, 83, 435-445.

Narayanan, A. (1983).

What is it like to be a machine?

(Research Report R-116).

Exeter, England: University of Exeter, Department of Computer Science.
Neisser, U. (1963). The imitation of man by machine.

Science, 139, 193-197.

Neisser, U. (1967). Cognitive psychology. New York: Appleton.
Neisser, U. (1982a). John Dean’s memory: A case study. In U. Neisser (Ed.), Memory
observed: Remembering in natural conterts. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.

Neisser, U. (Ed.). (1982b). Memory observed: Remembering in natural coniezrts. San
Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Neisser, U. (1982c). Memory: What are the important questions? In U. Neisser (Ed.),
Memory observed: Remembering in natural contexts. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Newell, A. (1982). The knowledge level. Artificial Intelligence, 18(1), 87-127.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972).
Prentice-Hall.

Human problem-solving.

Englewood Cliffs, NJ:

Newell, A., Shaw, J. C., & Simon, H. A. (1957). Empirical explorations of the logic
theory machine. Proceedings of the West Joint Computer Conference (vol. 15, pp.

218-239).

Nilsson, N. J. (1980).
Kaufmann.

Principles of artificial intelligence.

Los Altos, CA: Morgan

Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling more than we can know: Verbal reports
on mental processes. Psychological Review, 84, 231-259.

Norman, D. A. (1981). Twelve issues for cognitive science. In D. A. Norman (Ed.),
Perspectives on cognitive science (pp. 265-295). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Norman, D. A. (1982). Learning and memory.

San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.

Norman, D. A. (1986). Reflections on cognition and parallel distributed processing. In
J. L. McClelland, D. E. Rumelhart, & PDP Research Group (Eds.), Parallel distributed
processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition. Volume 2: Psychological
and biological models (pp. 531-546). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Ornstein, R. E. (Ed.). (1973). The nature of human consciousness. New York: Viking.

REFERENCES

295

Osborn, A. F. (1953). Applied imagination. New York: Scribners.

Osgood, C. E., & Tannenbaum, P. (1955). The principle of congruity and the prediction of attitude change. Psychological Review, 362, 42-55.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms:
Basic Books.

Children, computers,

and powerful ideas. New York:

Paton, R. (1972). Fantasy content, daydreaming frequency and the reduction of aggression. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, City University of New York.

Pearl, J. (1982). Reverend Bayes on inference engines: a distributed hierarchical
approach. In Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp.
133-136). Los Altos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Pekala, R. J., & Levine, R. L. (1981). Mapping consciousness: Development of an
empirical-phenomenological approach. Imagination, Cognition and Personality, 1(1),

29-47.
Pfeifer, R. (1982). Cognition and emotion: An information processing approach (CIP
Working Paper 436). Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie-Mellon University, Department of
Psychology.
Plutchik, R. (1980). A general psychoevolutionary theory of emotion. In Plutchik,
R. (Ed.), Emotion: Theory, research, and experience. Volume 1: Theories of emotion

(pp. 3-33). New York: Academic Press.

Pohl, I. (1971).

Bi-directional search.

In B. Meltzer & D. Michie (Eds.), Machine

intelligence 6 (pp. 127-140). Edinburgh, Scotland: Edinburgh Univeristy Press.

Poincaré, H. (1952). Mathematical creation. In B. Ghiselin (Ed.), The creative process.
New York: Mentor. (Original work published 1908)
Polya, G. (1945). How to solve it. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Pope, K. S. (1978). How gender, solitude, and posture influence the stream of consciousness. In K. S. Pope & J. L. Singer (Eds.), The stream of consciousness. New
York: Plenum.
Pope, K. S., & Singer, J. L. (1978a). Regulation of the stream of consciousness: Toward
a theory of ongoing thought. In G. E. Schwartz & D. Shapiro (Eds.), Consciousness
and self regulation: Advances in research (Vol. 2). New York: Plenum.

Pope, K. S., & Singer, J. L. (Eds.). (1978b). The stream of consciousness. New York:
Plenum.
Posey, T. B., & and Losch, M. E. (1983). Auditory hallucinations of hearing voices in
375 normal subjects. Imagination,

Cognition and Personality, 3(2), 99-113.

Potzl, O. (1960) The relationship between experimentally induced dream images and
indirect vision. Psychological Issues, 38, Monograph 7, 41-120. New York: International
Universities Press. (Original work published 1917)
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1984). Computation and cognition:
tive science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Toward a foundation for cogni-

Quillian, M. R. (1968). Semantic memory. In M. Minsky (Ed.), Semantic information
processing (pp. 227-270). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

REFERENCES

296

Quinn, N. (1981). Marriage is a do-it-yourself project: The organization of marital
goals. In Proceedings of the Third Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 31-40), Berkeley, CA.

Randell, B. (1975). System structure for software fault tolerance. IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering, SE-1(2), 220-232.
Rapaport, D. (Ed.). (1951).
Columbia University Press.

Organization

and pathology of thought.

New York:

Rapaport, D. (1960). The structure of psychoanalytic theory: A systematizing attempt. Psychological Issues, 2, Monograph 6. New York: International Universities
Press.

Rapaport, D. (1974). The history of the concept of association of ideas.
International Universities Press.

New York:

Reed, D. P. (1978). Naming and synchronization in a decentralized computer system (Technical Report 205). Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Laboratory for Computer Science.

Rees, J. A., Adams, N. I., & Meehan, J. R. (1984). The T manual (4th ed.). New
Haven, CT: Yale University, Computer Science Department.

Reik, T. (1948). Listening with the third ear: The inner experience of a psychoanalyst.
New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux.

Reiser, B. J. (1983). Contexts and indices in autobiographical memory (Technical
Report 24). New Haven, CT: Yale University, Cognitive Science Program.
Ritchie, D. M., & Thompson, K. (1974). The UNIX time-sharing system.
cations of the ACM, 17(7), 365-375.

Communi-

Robinson, J. A. (1965). A machine-oriented logic based on the resolution principle.
Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery, 12(1), 23-41.
Rosenblatt, F. (1962). Principles of neurodynamics.

New York: Spartan.

Rosenbloom, P. S. (1983). The chunking of goal hierarchies: A model of practice
and stimulus-response compatibility (Technical Report 83-148). Doctoral dissertation,
Department of Computer Science, Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.
Rothenberg, A. (1979). The emerging goddess: The creative process in art, science,
and other fields. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Rulifson, J., Derksen, J., & Waldinger, R. (1972). QA4: A procedural calculus for
intuitive reasoning (Technical Note 73). Stanford, CA: Stanford Research Institute,
Artificial Intelligence Center.

Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., & McClelland, J. L. (1986). A general framework for
parallel distributed processing. In D. E. Rumelhart, J. L. McClelland, & PDP Research
Group (Eds.), Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of
cognition. Volume 1: Foundations (pp. 45-76). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Rumelhart, D. E., McClelland, J. L., & PDP Research Group (Eds.). (1986). Parallel
distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition.
Volume 1:
Foundations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

REFERENCES

297

Rumelhart, D. E., & Norman, D. A. (1982). Simulating a skilled typist: A study of
skilled cognitive-motor performance. Cognitive Science, 6, 1-36.
Rumelhart, D. E., Smolensky, P., McClelland, J. L., & Hinton, G. E. (1986). Schemata
and sequential thought processes in PDP models. In J. L. McClelland, D. E. Rumelhart, & PDP Research Group (Eds.), Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in
the microstructure of cognition. Volume 2: Psychological and biological models (pp.
7-57). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rumelhart, D. E., & Zipser, D. (1986). Feature discovery by competitive learning. In

D. E. Rumelhart, J. L. McClelland, & PDP Research Group (Eds.), Parallel distributed
processing:

Explorations

in the microstructure

of cognition.

Volume

1: Foundations

(pp. 151-193). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Russell, B. (1945). A history of western philosophy. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Sacerdoti, E. D. (1974).

Planning in a hierarchy of abstraction spaces.

Artificial

Intelligence, 5, 115-135.
Sacerdoti, E. D. (1977). A structure for plans and behavior. New York: Elsevier.
Salaman, E. (1970).
London: Longman.

A collection

Schank, R. C. (1975).
vier.

Conceptual information processing. New York: American Else-

Schank, R. C. (1977).
421-441.

of moments:

A study of involuntary

Rules and topics in conversation.

Schank, R. C. (1982). Dynamic memory.

Cambridge:

Schank, R. C. (1986). Explanation patterns:
atively. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Schank, R. C., & Abelson, R. P. (1977).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Cognitive Science,

R. C., Wilensky,

(1978).

Representing attitudes:

R., Carbonell,

1(4),

Cambridge University Press.

Understanding mechanically

and cre-

Scripts, plans, goals, and understanding.

Schank, R. C., & Riesbeck, C. K. (1981). Inside computer understanding:
grams plus miniatures. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Schank,

memories.

J. G., Kolodner,

Five pro-

J. L., & Hendler,

J. A.

Some primitive states (Research Report 128). New

Haven, CT: Yale University, Computer Science Department.

Schachter, S., & Singer, J. E. (1962). Cognitive, social and physiological determinants
of emotional state. Psychological Review, 69, 379-399.
Segal, B., Huba, G., & Singer, J. L. (1980). Drugs, daydreaming,
study of college youth. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

and personality: A

Selfridge, O. G. (1959). Pandemonium: A paradigm for learning. In Proceedings of
the Symposium on the Mechanization of Thought Processes (vol. 1). London: H. M.
Stationary Office.
Shanon, B. (1981). Thought sequences and the language of consciousness. In Proceedings of the Third Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 234-235),
Berkeley, CA.

REFERENCES

298

Mental rotation of three-dimensional objects.

Shepard, R. N., & Metzler, J. (1971).
Science, 171, 701-703.

Shapero, H. (1952). The musical mind. In B. Ghiselin (Ed.), The creative process.
New York: Mentor. (Original work published 1946)
Shortliffe, E. H. (1976).
American Elsevier.

Computer-based medical consultations:

MYCIN.

New York:

Shortliffe, E. H., & Buchanan, B. G. (1975). A model of inexact reasoning in medicine.
Mathematical Biosciences, 23, 351-379.

Silberer, H. (1951). Report on a method of eliciting and observing certain symbolic hallucination-phenomena. In D. Rapaport (Ed.), Organization and pathology
of thought. New York: Columbia University Press. (Original work published 1909).

Simon, H. (1967).

Motivational and emotional controls of cognition.

Psychological

Review, 74(1), 29-39.

Simon, H. (1974). How big is a chunk? Science, 183, 482-488.
Singer, J. L. (1966). Daydreaming.

New York: Random House.

Singer, J. L. (1974). Daydreaming and the stream of thought. American Scientist, 62,
244-252.

Singer, J. L. (1975). The inner world of daydreaming. New York: Harper & Row.
Singer, J. L. (1978). Experimental studies of daydreaming and the stream of consciousness. In K. S. Pope & J. L. Singer (Eds.), The stream of consciousness. New
York: Plenum.
Singer, J. L. (1981). Towards the scientific study of imagination.
nition, and Personality, 1(1), 5-28.

Imagination,

Cog-

Singer, J. L., & Antrobus, J. S. (1963). A factor analysis of daydreaming and conceptually related cognitive and personality variables. Perceptual and Motor Skills,
Monograph supplement, 3-V17.
Singer, J. L., & Antrobus, J. S. (1972). Daydreaming, imaginal processes and personality: A normative study. In P. W. Sheehan (Ed.), The function and nature of
umagery. New York: Academic Press.

Singer, J. L., & McCraven, V. (1961).

Some characteristics of adult daydreaming.

Journal of Psychology, 51, 151-164.

Singer, J. L., & Pope, K. S. (1978).

The power of human imagination.

New York:

Plenum.
Skinner, B. F. (1935). Two types of conditioned reflex and a pseudo type. Journal of
General Psychology, 12, 66-77.

Sloman, A., & Croucher, M. (1981). Why robots will have emotions. In Proceedings
of the Seventh International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 197-202).
Los Altos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.

Small, S., & Rieger, C. (1982). Parsing and comprehending with word experts (a
theory and its realization). In W. G. Lehnert & M. H. Ringle (Eds.), Strategies for
natural language processing. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

REFERENCES

299

Smirnov, A. A. (1973). Problems of the psychology of memory.

New York: Plenum.

Smith, B. (1982). Reflection and semantics in a procedural language (Technical Report 272). Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Laboratory for
Computer Science.
Smith, D. E., Genesereth, M. R., & Ginsberg, M. L. (1986).
inference. Artificial Intelligence, 30, 343-389.

Controlling recursive

Smolensky, P. (1986a). Information processing in dynamical systems: Foundations
of harmony theory. In D. E. Rumelhart, J. L. McClelland, & PDP Research Group
(Eds.), Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition.
Volume 1: Foundations (pp. 194-281). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Smolensky, P. (1986b). Neural and conceptual interpretation of PDP models. In J.
L. McClelland, D. E. Rumelhart, & PDP Research Group (Eds.), Parallel distributed
processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition. Volume 2: Psychological
and biological models (pp. 390-431). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sofer, K. (1981, October). Art? Or Not Art? Datamation, pp. 118-127.

Starker, S. (1982).

Fantastic thought: All about dreams, daydreams, hallucinations,

and hypnosis. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Stoller, R. J. (1979).
and Schuster.

Sexual excitement:

Dynamics

of erotic life. New York:

Simon

Stoy, J. E. (1977). Denotational semantics: The Scott-Strachey approach to programming language theory. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Suinn, R. M. (1984). Visual motor behavior rehearsal: The basic technique. Scandinavian Journal of Behaviour Therapy, 13(3), 131-142.
Suppes, P. & Warren, H. (1975). On the generation and classification of defence
mechanisms. International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 56, 405-414.

Sussman, G. J. (1975). A computer model of skill acquisition. New York: American
Elsevier.

Sussman, G. J., & Steele, G. L., Jr. (1975). SCHEME: An interpreter for extended
lambda calculus (AI Memo 349). Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
Tarnopolsky,
manuscript.

Y. (1986).

Spontaneous

thinking

as natural selection.

Unpublished

Tart, C. T. (Ed.). (1969). Altered states of consciousness. New York: John Wiley.
Thompson, K. (1978). UNIX implementation. The Bell System Technical Journal,
516), Part 2, 1931-1946.
Titchener, E. B. (1912). The schema of introspection. American Journal of Psychology, 23, 485-508.
Tomkins, S. S. (1962). Affect, imagery, consciousness. Vol. I. The positive affects.
New York: Springer.
Tomkins, S. S. (1963). Affect, imagery, consciousness.
New York: Springer.

Vol. I. The negative affects.

REFERENCES

300

Touretzky, D. S. (1986). Boltzcons. In The Eighth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society.
Tulving, E. (1972). Episodic and semantic memory. In E. Tulving & W. Donaldson
(Eds.), Organization of memory. New York: Academic Press.
Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of episodic memory.

New York: Oxford University Press.

Turing, A. M. (1936). On computable numbers, with an application to the Entscheidungsproblem. In Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 2(42), 230-265,

and 2(43), 544-546.
Turing, A. M. (1950). Computing machinery and intelligence. Mind, 54(236), 433-460.
Varendonck,
Unwin.

J. (1921).

The psychology

of day-dreams.

London:

George Allen &

Wallas, G. (1926). The art of thought. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Waltz, D. L., & Boggess, L. (1979). Visual analog representations for natural language
understanding. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (pp. 926-934). Los Altos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Waltz, D. L., & Pollack, J. B. (1985). Massively parallel parsing: A strongly interactive
model of natural language interpretation. Cognitive Science, 9(1), 75-112.
Warren, H. C. (1921). A history of the association psychology. New York: Scribner’s.

Watkins, M. M. (1976). Waking dreams. New York: Gordon and Breach.
Watson, J. B. (1924). Behaviorism.

New York: W. W. Norton.

Weiner, B. (1980a). A cognitive (attribution)-emotion-action model of motivated behavior: An analysis of judgments of help-giving. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 39, 186-200.

Weiner, B. (1980b). Human motivation. New York: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston.
Weiner, B. (1982). The emotional consequences of causal attributions. In M. S. Clark
& S. T. Fiske (Eds.), Affect and cognition: The 17th Annual Carnegie Symposium on
Cognition. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Weizenbaum, J. (1966). ELIZA—-A computer program for the study of natural language communication between man and machine. Communications of the ACM, 91),

36-45.
Weizenbaum, J. (1974). Automating psychotherapy [Letter to the editor]. Communications of the ACM, 17(7), 543.

Wertheimer, M. (1945). Productive thinking. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Whitney, J. (1980). Dagital harmony:
art. Peterborough, NH: Byte Books.

On the complementarity

Wilensky, R. (1983). Planning and understanding:
man reasoning. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

of music and visual

A computational approach to hu-

Williams, M. D., & Hollan, J. D. (1981). The process of retrieval from very long term
memory.

Cognitive Science, 5, 87-119.

Winston, P. H. (1984). Artificial intelligence. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

REFERENCES

301

Winston, P. H., & Horn, B. K. P. (1981). LISP. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Wirth, N. (1971). The programming language PASCAL. Acta Informatica, 1, 35-63.

Woodworth, R. S., & Schlosberg, H. (1954). Experimental psychology (Revised Edition). New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Xenakis, I. (1971).

Formalized music.

Bloomington,

Indiana:

Indiana University

Press.

Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Feeling and thinking: Preferences need no inferences. American
Psychologist, 35, 151-175.

—
—s

ual La

paterm

oS

Lescitahs
at

in

aa

:

w

ety

Shree

Ve enh cnrve lie nat Sweaty

eae
af?
°

; ~S
Wi

:

miei y

< - os

ng

btn

aah outers

a? dip- dems’

Lat 7 ae
Es

-

[

=

ae

2

alae!

i

pee

a

Re

=r

|

a

ee

4

Ta

>

aah:

ok

erth bewatinmal Inte Conformabe
im

e

eee

Sv

tlie ant
g on
i.
ponnemesigqns Se

ee

mets:

ane:bez phase, nae

cA

(Oui)

Vedge) Rasdeais

=r aaen *y (erat. Quang

mierpertaann”

Caguitiae

brine

a

7

=

Aa

ad

i

:

_

Ai, hide

Gime A 2lise S iileKy-u) thw Concnaton-semcinien See Vall
ss,

|

-—™

a

_

——

" Baa

re;
.

:

eT

5

|
+

tae

Si

Y

=

=~

ae ee

:

-"

—

Tee

‘

rr

7

—

é

i

rh

!

‘

ra)

bi

en

(

‘

a

j

¢

:

me

—

'
t

—

tank

4

'

s

f

‘Gan

oo

Fax,

|

ais

re

at

ee

i.

a

tee
_—

oe An

7

_—

-

—

——

at

Z
‘

ogre

Lar)
eine!

er
~

a

eo

martes al prrerrael

lie ag, WOE
ci

adi
7]

«<

A

Appendix

A

Annotated

Traces

from

DAY DREAMER
In this appendix, we present annotated traces of some of the daydreams and
external experiences produced by DAYDREAMER. Because of space limitations,
not all daydreams and experiences produced by the program can be reproduced
here. Portions have also been omitted from some of the traces; these are marked
by ellipses.

A.1

LOVERS1

Experience

Initialize DAYDREAMER
Creating initial reality context Cx.3
State changes from SUSPENDED to DAYDREAMING

The program first creates an initial reality context—the context designated
as containing the state of the simulated “real world” as seen by the program.
Various initial facts are asserted into this context: DAYDREAMER has a job;
she is not involved in a romantic relationship; she is romantically interested in
Harrison Ford; she is currently at home; she knows where the Nuart Theater is;
and so on. DAYDREAMER then starts out in daydreaming mode.
FI
II

IKK

Lovers-theme

fired

IF

LOVERS

THEN

self

not

as

inference

with

in

anyone

Cx.3

and

SEX or LOVE-GIVING

or LOVE-RECEIVING

below threshold
activate goal for

LOVERS

Activate

top-level

| I want

to be going

with

goal #{0b.1882:
out

with

or COMPANIONSHIP

a person

(ACTIVE-GOAL

someone.

303

obj

(LOVERS

actor

...)...)}

TRACES FROM DAYDREAMER

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

304

| I feel

really

Concerns:
#{0B.1882:

interested

(ACTIVE-GOAL

in going

out

(LOVERS

actor

obj

with

someone.

eee

«8

COn9)

sHAETED

DAYDREAMER activates a top-level LOVERS goal because she is not involved in such a relationship and one or more of her need states subsumed by
the relationship are unsatisfied. A new concern is created and a positive motivating emotion of interest is created and associated with the new concern. The
intrinsic importance of the LOVERS goal is 0.9. This becomes the magnitude
of the motivating emotion, as well as the current value for the motivation of the
concern.
The top-level goal is stated in terms of a variable: The objective of the goal
is a relationship whose participants are the daydreamer and some appropriate
male. A variable is generated in English as “someone” or “something.”
A
concrete value for this variable will have to be found in order to achieve the
goal.
Whenever facts are asserted into a context, they are converted into English
and produced as output. A simple collection of heuristics associated with classes
of representations and particular rules, however, selectively omits generation of
certain facts in order to make the English output sound more natural.
The LOVERS goal is first invoked as a halted concern; work therefore cannot
proceed toward this goal until a serendipity occurs. In the current version of
DAYDREAMER, this is done in lieu of having the program go through several
plans to achieve this goal, all of which are unsuccessful, and then halting the
goal until a new plan is suggested through serendipity or fortuitous success of
a subgoal.
FIIO

RIK

Entertainment-theme

IF
THEN

fired

as

inference

in

Cx.3

ENTERTAINMENT need below threshold
activate goal for ENTERTAINMENT

FEI
III I IK
Activate
| I want
| I feel

top-level goal #{0B.1887: (ACTIVE-GOAL
to be entertained.
interested in being entertained.

obj

(ENTERTAINMENT...)...)}

Concerns:

#{0B.1887:
#{0B.1882:

(ACTIVE-GOAL
(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj
obj

(ENTERTAINMENT...)...)}
(LOVERS actor ...)...)}

(0.6)
(0.9)

HALTED

Next DAYDREAMER activates an ENTERTAINMENT goal because its need
for entertainment is unsatisfied. Another concern and associated motivating
emotion are activated.
Running

emotion-driven

Switching

#{CX.3:

control

to new top-level

(CX)} --> #{CX.4:

FESO
IG IO IOIII HK aK

loop...

goal #{0B.1887:

(CX)}

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(ENTERTAINMENT)}

A.1.

LOVERS1

EXPERIENCE

Entertainment-plani

fired

as

for #{0B.1887: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.3 sprouting Cx.4
IF

goal for ENTERTAINMENT

THEN

subgoal

305

plan

obj

(ENTERTAINMENT...)...)}

for M-MOVIE

| I have to go see a movie.

The top-level control loop is invoked once DAYDREAMER has gotten off
the ground by applying inferences and, as a result, creating two concerns. The
most highly motivated nonhalted concern is ENTERTAINMENT
and therefore
a unit of planning is performed for this concern. The program has a rule which
states that a goal for ENTERTAINMENT may be achieved by achieving an MMOVIE subgoal. Thus a new context is sprouted in which the top-level goal
for ENTERTAINMENT is connected to a subgoal for M-MOVIE. (Hereafter, we
call this “sprouting a plan.”) This context becomes the new reality context.
#{CX.4: (CX)} --> #{CX.5:
FIII IC
M-movie-alone-plan

fired

(CX)}
as plan

for #{0B.1897: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.4 sprouting Cx.5
IF

goal

THEN

subgoals

for

PTRANS

#{CX.5:

M-MOVIE
to

back

obj

(M-MOVIE

actor

alone

PTRANS

to

theater,

to original

(CX)} --> #{CX.6:

MTRANS

movie,

and

location

(CX)}

Fact plan #{0B.286: (AT actor Nuart-theater obj
(AT actor Nuart-theater obj ...)
FEO
OI ACR IK
Goal #{0B.1902: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (AT actor ...)
Instantiating

...)...)}

...)} found

top-level-goal

...)} succeeds

Plan

A plan is sprouted for M-MOVIE: go to a theater, watch the movie, and
. go home. The particular theater is not specified by this plan; it is initially a
variable. Next, however, a fact is found in the current reality context which
unifies with (matches) an active subgoal. This fact gives the location of a
specific theater—the Nuart Theater. Therefore, a new context is sprouted in
which the active subgoal becomes a succeeded subgoal with the variable replaced by the specific theater. In fact, in this new context, the entire plan
for ENTERTAINMENT—the top-level goal and all descendant subgoals—is instantiated with the variable bindings (values) resulting from the unification.’ In
general, a variable may be propagated from subgoal to further subgoal, so that
when a value for that variable is found, it is necessary to replace the variable
with its value in any and all subgoals containing that variable.
1The following optimization is performed in DAYDREAMER:
if it contains variables.

a subgoal is only instantiated

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

306

#{CKE6s)

(CMTE

——>

FEO
O
IG
Ptrans-plan

IF
THEN

(CXF

IGK

fired

for #{0B.1923:
in Cx.6

HICK

TRACES FROM DAYDREAMER

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj

(PTRANS

actor

...)...)}

Cx.7

goal for person to PTRANS to a location
subgoal for person to KNOW that location

FEO IK
Goal #{0B.1933: (ACTIVE-GOAL
Instantiating

obj

(KNOW actor

...)...)}

succeeds

plan.

A plan is sprouted for the subgoal of going to the Nuart Theater: DAYDREAMER must know where the theater is located. This subgoal then succeeds
because this fact is found in the current reality context.
Subgoals
About

of #{0B.1923:

to perform

(ACTIVE-GOAL

real

action

but

#{0B.1887:

not

obj

(PTRANS

Current

concern

waits

No more

concerns

to process;

switching

Waking up concern

#{0B.1887:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

State

changes

from DAYDREAMING

Subgoals

of #{0B.1923:

Perform

external

actor

in performance

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

completed

(ENTERTAINMENT...)...)}

to performance

obj

...)...)}

mode
mode

(ENTERTAINMENT...)...)}

to PERFORMANCE

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(PTRANS

actor

...)...)}

completed

action

Perform action goal #{0B.1923: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (PTRANS actor ...)...)
FESS aK
Goal #{0B.1923: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (PTRANS actor ...)...)} succeeds
Instantiating

plan.

| I go to the Nuart.

FOCI
OIA IK
At-plan2
IF
THEN

fired

as

inference

in Cx.7

person PTRANS from one location
person AT new location and
no longer AT old location

to another

Next, all of the preconditions (subgoals) of the PTRANS subgoal have succeeded, and so this action may be performed. However, actions may only be
performed in performance mode and DAYDREAMER is currently in daydreaming mode. Therefore, the ENTERTAINMENT concern is placed into a waiting
condition. Next, the top-level control loop fails to find any concerns to process,
since all concerns are either waiting or halted. Therefore, the system enters
performance mode. Whenever the system enters performance mode, all waiting
concerns are woken up. Thus the ENTERTAINMENT concern is woken up.
Now since all of the subgoals of PTRANS have succeeded and the system 7s in
performance mode, the external action of PTRANS is performed. An inference
retracts the old location of DAYDREAMER (home) in the current reality context
and asserts the new one (the Nuart Theater).

A.1.

LOVERS1

EXPERIENCE

Taking

optional

external

Enter

concepts

in #{CX.7:

| Input:

Harrison

Ford

307

input

(CX)}

is at the

Nuart.

FCI
III IK
Vprox-plani

IF
THEN

fired

as

inference

in Cx.7

AT location of person
VPROX that person

Serendipity!!

(personal

goal)

([OB.1958: (AG. (LOVERS actor
([0B.2180: (AG. (ACQUAINTED

(OB.2199:

(AG.

([OB.2176:
obj

(M-CONVERSATION

(AG.

(OB.2213:

Me Movie-stari)) EPISODE.1]
actor Me Movie-stari)) EPISODE.2]

actor Me Movie-star1))

(MTRANS-ACCEPTABLE

(AG.

(MTRANS

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

actor
(KNOW

actor

EPISODE.3]

Me Movie-stari))

EPISODE.4]

Me from Me to Movie-star1

actor
obj

Me
(TIME-OF-DAY)))))

EPISODE.5]

[0B.2221: (AG. (VPROX actor Movie-star1 Me)) EPISODE.6]
[OB.2225: (AG. (AT actor Movie-star1 obj Nuart-location))]
[0B.2228: (AG. (AT actor Me obj Nuart-location))]
[0B.2205: (AG. (MTRANS actor Me from Me to Movie-star1i
obj

(INTRODUCTION)
))]

(0B.2209:

(AG.

(MTRANS

actor

Movie-star1

from Movie-stari

to Me

obj (INTRODUCTION)))]
[O0B.2184: (AG. (ROMANTIC-INTEREST obj Movie-star1))]
([OB.2187: (AG. (BELIEVE actor Movie-star1
obj (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (LOVERS actor Me Movie-star1))))]
([OB.2192: (AG. (M-DATE actor Me Movie-star1))]
(O0B.2195: (AG. (M-AGREE actor Me Movie-star1
obj (LOVERS actor Me Movie-star1)))]
HUCK
CCX) a= =>
Generate surprise

| What

CK 9s
emotion

(CX):

(CX)} --> #{CX.10:

(CX)}

do you know!

#{CX.7:
Concerns:

#{0B.1887:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(ENTERTAINMENT...)...)}

(0.6)

#{0B.1882:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(LOVERS

(1.15)

Switching

to new top-level

actor

goal #{0B.1882:

...)...)}

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(LOVERS

actor))}

Now DAYDREAMER is provided with an input state: Harrison Ford happens
to be at the Nuart Theater. The English sentence is mapped to the corresponding fact by the parser and asserted into the current reality context. The fact
that the movie star and DAYDREAMER are VPROX—able to communicate—is
then inferred.
Next, an input-state-driven serendipity is detected. The input state that
Harrison Ford is AT the Nuart Theater is applicable to the active LOVERS

goal of DAYDREAMER, since: (a) in order to be LOVERS with someone, one
must be ACQUAINTED with the person, (b) in order to be ACQUAINTED
with the person, one may have an M-CONVERSATION with the person, (c) in
order to have an M-CONVERSATION with the person, it must be MTRANSACCEPTABLE for one to talk to the person, (d) in order for it to be MTRANSACCEPTABLE to talk to the person, one may MTRANS a simple favor to the

TRACES

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

308

FROM DAYDREAMER

person, such as knowing the time of day, (e) in order to MTRANS

to the person,

one must be VPROX the person, and (f) in order to be VPROX to the person,
one may be AT the same location as the person. Several serendipities are in
fact possible here; the one with the longest path—shorter than some maximum
length—is chosen.
The serendipity results in an episode suitable for use by the analogical planning mechanism. This episode is associated with the LOVERS goal as a suggestion for how to achieve that goal.
As a result of serendipity, the LOVERS concern is unhalted and a surprise
emotion is generated and associated with the concern. The dynamic importance or level of motivation of the LOVERS concern thus increases from 0.9 to
1.15. Now the top-level control loop selects the LOVERS concern for processing,
switching from the previously current ENTERTAINMENT concern.
Run analogical

#{CX.9:
Apply

plan for #{0B.1882:

(CX)} --> #{CX.11:
existing

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(LOVERS

actor

...)...)

(CX)}

analogical

plan

FESR
IIK AK
Lovers-plan

fired

for #{0B.1882:
in Cx.9

IF
THEN

as

analogical

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

plan

obj (LOVERS actor

...)...)}

Cx.i1

goal for LOVERS with a person
subgoals for ACQUAINTED with person
ROMANTIC-INTEREST in person and
person have ACTIVE-GOAL of LOVERS
self and
person M-DATE self and
person M-AGREE to LOVERS

and

with

self

and

#{CX.11: (CX)} --> #{CK.12: (CX)}
SECO
I IO CICK
Goal #{0B.2353: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (ROMANTIC-INTEREST...)...)}
Instantiating plan.
Apply existing analogical

plan

SEO
I IGG IaK
Acquainted-plan

fired

for #{0B.2249:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

in Cx.11
IF
THEN

sprouting

as

analogical

obj

Cx.12

goal to be ACQUAINTED with
subgoal for M-CONVERSATION

| I have

to have

#{CX.12:

(CX)} --> #{CX.13:

a conversation

Apply

existing

FIO

IG OIC IK

analogical

M-conversation-plan

plan

(ACQUAINTED...)...)}

fired

person
with person
with

him.

(CX)}
plan
as

analogical

for #{0B.2269: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.12 sprouting Cx.13

obj

IF

between

goal for M-CONVERSATION

plan

(M-CONVERSATION...)...)}

personi

and

succeeds

A.1.

THEN

LOVERS1

EXPERIENCE

309

person2
subgoals for MTRANS-ACCEPTABLE between
and
person2 and
personil to MTRANS to person2 something
person2 to MTRANS to personi something

#{CX.13:

(CX)} --> #{CX.14:

personl

and

(CX)}

Apply existing analogical plan
FAO
I IO IK
Mtrans-acceptable-inf2 fired as analogical plan
for #{0B.2274: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS-ACCEPTABLE...)...)}
in Cx.13 sprouting Cx.14
IF

goal for MTRANS-ACCEPTABLE

between

self

and

THEN

other
subgoal
to KNOW

to other

that

self

actor

...)...)}

#{CX.14:
Apply

for
the

(CX)}

existing

self
time

-->

to MTRANS

#{CX.15:

analogical

has

ACTIVE-GOAL

(CX)}
plan

FI
AIO AC RICK
Mtrans-plan2

fired

for #{0B.2290:
in Cx.14
IF
THEN

as

analogical

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

plan

obj

(MTRANS

Cx.15

goal to MTRANS mental state to person
subgoal to be VPROX that person

#{CX.15:
Apply

(CX)} --> #{CX.16:

existing

analogical

(CX)}
plan

FEI
II I IR 1k
Vprox-plani fired as analogical

plan

for #{0B.2295:

(VPROX

in Cx.15
IF
THEN

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj

actor

...)...)}

Cx.16

goal to be VPROX to person
subgoal to be AT location of person

FI
IOI
OR AOI
Goal #{0B.2303: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (AT actor ...)
top-level-goal ...)} succeeds
FAO
OIC IO IOC
Goal #{0B.2300: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (AT actor ...)
top-level-goal ...)} succeeds
FOO IO IC I IC IC
Goal #{0B.2300: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (VPROX actor ...)
top-level-goal ...)} succeeds
Subgoals of #{0B.2369: (SUCCEEDED-GOAL obj (VPROX...)...)} completed
Subgoals of #{0B.2316: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS actor ...)...)} completed
Perform

external

action

Perform action goal #{0B.2316: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS actor ...)...)
FEO
COO ICCC
Goal #{0B.2316: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS actor ...)...)} succeeds
| I tell

Harrison

Ford

I would

like

to know

the

time.

Planning for the LOVERS goal then proceeds as suggested by the analogical
plan associated with the goal during the above serendipity. DAYDREAMER

TRACES FROM DAYDREAMER

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

310

finally performs the action of asking the movie star for the time. The program

will ask anyone for the time, unless (a) a high realism plan to achieve a LOVERS
goal with the person has been previously daydreamed

and incorporated into

episodic memory, and (b) this episode has a low desirability (i.e., the outcome
is negative). Thus, given a new person, DAYDREAMER will attempt to start a
conversation just in case she decides she is interested in the person (for example,
if the other person likes the same things that she does). Here, the subgoal
for ROMANTIC-INTEREST succeeds immediately because DAYDREAMER is
already romantically interested in Harrison Ford.
FAO
II II
Neg-att-inf fired
IF

THEN

as

inference

person is RICH and
self is AT same location as person and
self not WELL-DRESSED
person forms NEG-ATTITUDE toward self

| He does not think
FEO RIK

much

Believe-plani

as

IF
THEN

in Cx.17

MTRANS
person

FEI

fired

me

because

inference

mental state
BELIEVE self

IIR

of

I am

not

well

dressed.

in Cx.17

to person
mental state

ACK

Mtrans-acceptable-inf2
IF

self
KNOW

MTRANS to
the time

THEN

MTRANS-ACCEPTABLE

fired

other

as

inference

that

self

has

between

self

and

fired

inference

in Cx.17

ACTIVE-GOAL

to

other

SOO

IOI

III

RICK

Social-esteem-monitor

IF
THEN

as

in

Cx.17

person has NEG-ATTITUDE toward self and
self has POS-ATTITUDE toward person
failure of social esteem goal for person
toward self

| I fail

at him thinking

Personal
| I feel

goal outcome
really embarrassed.

highly

to have

POS-ATTITUDE

of me.

DAYDREAMER now infers that because she has spoken to the movie star
and she is not well dressed, he forms a negative attitude toward her. Thus
her SOCIAL ESTEEM personal goal fails and an emotional response of embarrassment is generated. However, since she has asked him the time, it is now
acceptable for the two to communicate.
FR

I A

RR

I kk okickcok

A.1.

LOVERS1 EXPERIENCE

Reversal-theme
IF
THEN

fired

as

311

inference

in Cx.17

NEG-EMOTION resulting from a FAILED-GOAL
activate daydreaming goal for REVERSAL of failure

FEO

III

Activate

top-level

goal #{0B.2412:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(REVERSAL...)...)

Concerns:
#{0B.2412: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj
#{0B.1887: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj
#{0B.1882: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj
#{CX.17: (CX)} --> #{CX.18:
FEO
I RICK

(REVERSAL...)...)} (0.98)
(ENTERTAINMENT...)...)} (0.6)
(LOVERS actor ...)...)} (1.15)
(CX)}

Rationalization-theme

as

inference

in Cx.17

NEG-EMOTION of sufficient
a FAILED-GOAL
activate daydreaming goal
of failure

strength

resulting

IF
THEN

FEI
IOI IO
Activate top-level

fired

for

goal #{0B.1420:

from

RATIONALIZATION

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

Concerns:
#{0B.1420:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(RATIONALIZATION...)...)}

#{0B.1887:
#{0B.1882:

(ACTIVE-GOAL
(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj
obj

(ENTERTAINMENT...)...)}
(LOVERS actor ...)...)}

#{0B.2412:
#{CX.17:

(RATIONALIZATION...)...)
(0.97)

(ACTIVE-GOAL obj (REVERSAL...)...)} (0.98)
(CX)}

--> #{CX.19:

(0.6)
(1.15)

(CX)}

In response to the negative emotion of embarrassment, DAYDREAMER activates a number of daydreaming goals: RATIONALIZATION (rationalize the

fact that Harrison Ford has a negative attitude toward her), ROVING (divert
attention from embarrassment to more pleasant thoughts), REVERSAL (plan
to avoid similar embarrassments in the future), and RECOVERY (generate a
future plan for Harrison Ford to have a positive, rather than negative, attitude
toward her). The level of motivation for these concerns is not as high as the
active LOVERS concern. However, even if they were higher, they would not
be processed until later since daydreaming goals are not processed when the
system is in performance mode.
FIO
I I ICR IAC

Goal #{0B.2331:

#{CX.17:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(CX)} --> #{CX.20:

(CX)}

FAI
IOC IIR
Mtrans-plan2 fired as plan
for #{0B.2327: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.17 sprouting Cx.20
IF
THEN

obj

(MTRANS-ACCEPTABLE...)...)}

(MTRANS

actor

succeeds

...)...)}

goal to MTRANS mental state to person
subgoal to be VPROX that person

FEI
ICI IAC
Goal #{0B.2444: (ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(VPROX

actor

...)...)}

succeeds

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

312

Subgoals

of #{0B.2327:

Perform

external

(ACTIVE-GGAL

actor

(MTRANS

obj

FROM DAYDREAMER

TRACES

= +) .«.)

}rcompleted

action

Perform action goal #{0B.2327: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS actor ...)...)
FEO
GRC
C
Goal #{0B.2327: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS actor ...)...)} succeeds
| I introduce myself to him.
FEO
I I III RK
Believe-plani
IF
THEN

MTRANS
person

#{CX.20:

fired

as

inference

mental state
BELIEVE self

in Cx.20

to person
mental state

(CX)} --> #{CK.21:

(CX)}

FERC
IOI IO II
Mtrans-plan2

fired

for #{0B.2323:
in Cx.20

IF
THEN

as

plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj

(MTRANS

actor

...)...)}

Cx.21

goal to MTRANS mental state to person
subgoal to be VPROX that person

FeGOO
IRA AK
Goal #{0B.2476: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (VPROX actor ...)...)} succeeds
Subgoals of #{0B.2323: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS actor ...)...)} completed
Perform other action #{0B.2323: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS actor ...)...)
Enter concepts in #{CX.21: (CX)}
Input: He introduces himself to me.
| He introduces himself to me.

Je OG
ok toktok
Goal

#{0B.2323:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(MTRANS

actor

...)...)}

succeeds

In order to achieve the M-CONVERSATION subgoal, DAYDREAMER introduces herself to the movie star who must then introduce himself to her. When
the preconditions (subgoals) succeed for a subgoal whose objective is an action performed by another person, DAYDREAMER waits for an input action.
If the input action unifies with (matches) the objective of the subgoal, then
the subgoal succeeds. Otherwise the subgoal fails. Here the expected action is
performed and the subgoal succeeds.
FER ICI
Believe-plani fired
IF
THEN

MTRANS
person

as

inference

mental state
BELIEVE self

in Cx.21

to person
mental state

FOO
IO IO IOI AIK
M-conversation-plan
IF

THEN

fired

as

inference

in Cx.21

MTRANS-ACCEPTABLE between personi and
person2 and
personi MTRANS to personi something and
person2 MTRANS to personi something
M-CONVERSATION between personi and

A.1.

LOVERS1 EXPERIENCE

313

person2

FIC

III CK

Acquainted-plan

IF
THEN

fired

as

inference

in Cx.21

M-CONVERSATION with person
ACQUAINTED with person

FEII IK
Goal

#{0B.2356:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

HICK. 21% (CX)I} <->
FIO
IK IIR
Lovers-theme-plan

fired

(ACQUAINTED...)...)}

obj

other

plan

(BELIEVE

actor

goal for self ACTIVE-GOAL of LOVERS with
subgoals for ROMANTIC-INTEREST in person
not LOVERS with anyone

| He has to be interested

in me.

| He cannot

with

be going

out

succeeds

(CX):

as backward

for #{0B.2348: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.21 sprouting Cx.22
IF
THEN

obj

#(CX 322%

...)...)}

a person
and

anyone.

DAYDREAMER has the subgoal for Harrison Ford to have the goal to be
romantically involved with her. A plan for this subgoal is generated through
backward other planning: applying a rule stated in terms of the self to another
person. Thus in order for Harrison to have an ACTIVE-GOAL of LOVERS with
DAYDREAMER, he must have ROMANTIC-INTEREST toward her and must
BELIEVE he is not LOVERS with anyone.
FEII RIK
Romantic-interest-plan

for #{0B.2527:
in Cx.22
IF
THEN

fired

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

as backward

obj

other

(BELIEVE actor

#{CX.23:

(CX)} --> #{CX.24:
relaxation,

...)...)}

Cx.23

goal to have ROMANTIC-INTEREST in person
subgoal to have POS-ATTITUDE toward person
person to be ATTRACTIVE

Subgoal

plan

and

(CX)}

#{0B.2539:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(BELIEVE

actor

...)...)}

succeeds

| Maybe he thinks I am cute.
#{CX.24: (CX)} --> #{CX.25: (CX)}
#{CX.24: (CX)} --> #{CX.26: (CX)}

Again through backward other planning, DAYDREAMER breaks down the
subgoal for Harrison to be romantically interested in her into subgoals for him
to have a positive attitude toward her and to think she is attractive. There are
no plans to make Harrison think she is attractive. Therefore, DAYDREAMER
employs the heuristic that a desired mental state of another person may be assumed if there is no information to the contrary. Although this is a heuristic for

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

314

TRACES FROM DAYDREAMER

daydreaming, it is also used in performance mode since the only other alternative would be to declare failure of the subgoal, which would result in a top-level

goal failure (since backtracking is not permitted in performance mode).
FEO
I AI IIOK
Positive-attitude-plan2

for #{0B.2543:
in Cx.24
IF
THEN

fired

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

as backward

obj

(BELIEVE

other

plan

actor

...)...)}

Cx.26

goal to have POS-ATTITUDE toward a person
subgoal for person to have POS-ATTITUDE toward

self

MOVIES
#{CX.26: (CX)} --> #{CX.27:
BOIS
IOC IK KK
Believe-plani

fired

as plan

for #{0B.2565: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.26 sprouting Cx.27
IF
THEN

(CX)}

obj

(BELIEVE

actor

...)...)}

goal for person to BELIEVE self mental state
subgoal to MTRANS mental state to person

#{CX.27:

(CX)} --> #{CX.28:

(CX)}

FEI
IC AIOK
Mtrans-plan2

fired

as

plan

for #{0B.2570: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.27 sprouting Cx.28
IF
THEN

obj

(MTRANS

actor

...)...)}

goal to MTRANS mental state to person
subgoal to be VPROX that person

FEC
I
aC IR
Goal #{0B.2575: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (VPROX actor ...)...)} succeeds
Subgoals of #{0B.2570: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS actor ...)...)} completed
Perform

external

action

Perform action goal #{0B.2570: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS actor ...)...)
FEO
IC II IK
Goal #{0B.2570: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS actor ...)...)} succeeds
| I tell him I like his movies.
FICO
II I IGE
Believe-plani
IF
THEN

MTRANS
person

fired

as

inference

mental state
BELIEVE self

in Cx.28

to person
mental state

SOOO
IOI IK aK

Goal

#{0B.2565:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(BELIEVE

actor

...)...)}

succeeds

Subgoals of #{0B.2610: (SUCCEEDED-GOAL obj (BELIEVE...)...)} completed
Subgoals of #{0B.2543: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} completed
FESO
III AIK
Goal #{0B.2543: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} succeeds
| He thinks highly of me.
Subgoals of #{0B.2527: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} completed
FOSS I AIOAI IK
Goal #{0B.2527: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} succeeds

A.1.

LOVERS1

EXPERIENCE

| He is interested

#{CX.28:
Subgoal
| Maybe

315

in me.

(CX)} --> #{CX.29:

(CX)}

relaxation, #{0B.2532: (ACTIVE-GOAL
he is not going out with anyone.

obj

(BELIEVE

actor

...)...)}

succeeds

FEI II IAIK
Goal #{0B.2532: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} succeeds
Subgoals of #{0B.2348: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} completed
FICCI
II AIK
Goal #{0B.2348: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} succeeds
| Maybe he wants to be going out with me.

#{CX.29:

(CX)} --> #{CX.30:

(CX)}

DAYDREAMER tells the movie star that she likes his movies in order to
get him to have a positive attitude toward her. After subgoal relaxation, DAY-

DREAMER

believes with low realism (certainty) that Harrison Ford wants to

be romantically involved with her.
FAO
IIH OK
M-date-plan

fired

as plan

for #{0B.2345: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.29 sprouting Cx.30
IF
THEN

obj

(M-DATE

to have POS-ATTITUDE toward activity
and
self to have POS-ATTITUDE toward activity and self and
other to M-AGREE to activity and self and

#{CX.30:

(CX)} --> #{CX.31:

FA

ICICI II

IO

M-agree-plan

fired

and

(CX)}

as plan

for #{0B.2671: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.30 sprouting Cx.31

THEN

...)...)}

goal for self and
other to M-DATE
subgoals for other

other to ENABLE-FUTURE-VPROX
to wait until a later time

IF

actor

obj

(M-AGREE

actor

...)...)}

goal for self and
other to M-AGREE to something
subgoals for self to MTRANS to other that self
ACTIVE-GOAL for that something and
for other to MTRANS to self that other BELIEVE
for that something

#{CX.31:

(CX)} --> #{CX.32:

BELIEVE
ACTIVE-GOAL

(CX)}

FOI
IO AOR IK
Mtrans-plan2

fired

as plan

for #{0B.2704: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.31 sprouting Cx.32

obj

(MTRANS

IF

goal

state

to person

THEN

subgoal

FRO

OI

AO

to MTRANS

OK

mental

to be VPROX
I

that

person

actor

...)...)}

TRACES

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

316

FROM DAYDREAMER

Goal #{0B.2714: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (VPROX actor ...)...)} succeeds
Subgoals of #{0B.2704: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS actor ...)...)} completed
Perform

external

action

Perform action goal #{0B.2704: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS actor ...)...)
FAI
ICI IAC I
Goal #{0B.2704: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS actor ...)...)} succeeds
| I tell

him

I would

like

to have

dinner

with

him

inference

in Cx.32

at a restaurant.

actor

...)...)}

FEO
Believe-plani

IF
THEN

MTRANS
person

#{CX.32:
FEO

fired

mental state
BELIEVE self

to person
mental state

(CX)} --> #{CX.33:
OCI

III

Mtrans-plan2

fired

for #{0B.2709:
in Cx.32
IF
THEN

as

(CX)}

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj

(MTRANS

Cx.33

goal to MTRANS mental state to person
subgoal to be VPROX that person

FEO
IOC IORI IIOK
Goal #{0B.2758: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (VPROX actor ...)...)} succeeds
Perform other action #{0B.2709: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS actor ...)...)
Enter concepts in #{CX.33: (CX)}
| Input: He declines.
FAC IC II I A ICIKk
Goal #{0B.2709: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS actor ...)...)} fails in #{CX.33:
SAAC aK
Believe-plan2
IF
THEN

MTRANS
person

fired

as

inference

(CX)}

in Cx.33

NOT mental state to person
BELIEVE self NOT mental state

He 2 A ee 2 2 og2 2 2 ie2 2 2 oieok

Goal #{0B.2671: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (M-AGREE actor ...)...)} fails in #{CX.33:
Subgoal of #{0B.2345: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (M-DATE actor ...)...)} failed
FOO
IOI III OK

(CX)}

Goal #{0B.2345:
(ACTIVE-GOAL obj (M-DATE actor
Subgoal of #{0B.1882:
(ACTIVE-GOAL obj (LOVERS

...)...)} fails
actor ...)...)}

in #{CX.33:
failed

(CX)}

FESO AIO
Goal #{0B.1882: (ACTIVE-GOAL

...)...)}

in #{CX.33:

(CX)}

Attempting

to backtrack

Top-level

goal #{0B.1882:

All

possibilities

obj

(ACTIVE-GOAL

Terminating planning
Leaf context #{CX.33: (CX)}
[0B.1882: (FG. (LOVERS actor
[NB.2518: (SG. (ACQUAINTED
(SG.

actor

obj

(LOVERS

actor

fails

...)...)}

fails

failed

FOO OCIS CII IOIICI
Goal #{0B.1882: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj
| I fail at going out with him.

[0B.2365:

(LOVERS

(LOVERS

actor

...)...)}

Me Movie-star1))]
actor Me Movie-star1))]

(ROMANTIC-INTEREST

obj

Movie-star1))]

fails

in #{CX.33:

(CX)}

A.1.

LOVERS1 EXPERIENCE

317

[0B.2648: (SG. (BELIEVE actor Movie-star1
obj (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (LOVERS actor Me Movie-star1))))]
[OB.2622: (SG. (BELIEVE actor Movie-star1

obj (ROMANTIC-INTEREST
[O0B.2547:

(SG.

(BELIEVE

obj Me)))]

actor

Movie-stari

obj (ATTRACTIVE actor Me)))]
[OB.2617:
obj

(SG.

(BELIEVE

(POS-ATTITUDE

actor

([0B.2610: (SG. (BELIEVE
obj (BELIEVE actor Me

obj
(0B.2581:

obj

(SG.

(POS-ATTITUDE

Movie-star1

obj Me)))]

actor

Movie-star1

(POS-ATTITUDE

obj (MOVIES obj Movie-star1)))))]

(MTRANS

Me from Me to Movie-star1

actor

obj (MOVIES obj Movie-star1))))]

[0B.2577: (SG. (VPROX actor Movie-star1 Me))]
[OB.2643: (SG. (BELIEVE actor Movie-star1i
obj (NOT obj (LOVERS actor Movie-star1))))]
([0B.2807: (FG. (M-DATE actor Me Movie-star1))]
(OB.2341: (AG. (M-AGREE actor Me Movie-star1
obj (LOVERS actor Me Movie-stari)))]
Removing

motivating

Emotional

responses

| I feel

really

emotions

angry

at him.

In order to go on an M-DATE with the movie star, DAYDREAMER has to
get the movie star to agree to have dinner at a restaurant. She asks him if
he would like to have dinner, but he declines. Thus the subgoal for the movie
star to MTRANS that he would like to have dinner fails, resulting in failure
of the M-AGREE subgoal, in turn resulting in failure of the M-DATE subgoal,
finally resulting in the failure of the top-level LOVERS goal. The action of
Harrison—his negative MTRANS—is noted in the reality context as the cause
of the top-level goal fuilure. The LOVERS concern fails, its motivating interest
emotion is terminated, and an emotional response is generated. The resulting
negative emotion is directed toward the movie star, since he is the one who
performed the action which caused the personal goal failure. This is generated
as an anger emotion.
DAYDREAMER bluntly asks Harrison Ford if he would like to have din-

ner. However, Gibbs and R. A. G. Mueller (1988) have observed that people
prefer to preface such a request with an utterance designed to remove the greatest potential obstacle to achieving the request. Thus one might more likely
first say “What are you doing Friday night?”. In DAYDREAMER, obstacles
(or subgoals) involving the other person for which no plans are available are
merely hypothesized away (through subgoal relaxation); thus in the trace we
have Maybe he is not going out with anyone and Maybe he thinks I am cute.
Although detailed planning of conversational utterances is not performed by
DAYDREAMER, avoiding embarrassment resulting from a negative response to
a request could be accomplished via the REVERSAL daydreaming goal. Rules
would have to be added to infer failure of a social regard preservation goal upon
a negative response to a request for a date. If no plans were available to ensure a

FROM DAYDREAMER

TRACES

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

318

positive response to the request (such as plans for verbally removing obstacles),
the system would simply not perform the request at all.?

#{CX.33:

(CX)} --> #{CX.34:

(CX)}

Concerns:

#{0B.1420:
#{0B.2412:
#{0B.1887:

(ACTIVE-GOAL
(ACTIVE-GOAL
(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj
obj
obj

(RATIONALIZATION...)...)} (0.97)
(REVERSAL...)...)} (0.98)
(ENTERTAINMENT...)...)} (0.6)

Switching

to new top-level

goal #{0B.1887:

#{CX.34:

(CX)} --> #{CX.35:

(CX)}

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(ENTERTAINMENT)}

FAIR
II IAC K
Mtrans-movie-plan

for #{0B.1919:
in Cx.34
IF
THEN

sprouting

as plan

obj

(CX)}

(MTRANS

actor

...)...)}

Cx.35

goal to MTRANS a movie
subgoal to be AT location

#{CX.35:

Fact

fired

(ACTIVE-GOAL

-->

#{CX.36:

plan #{0B.286:

of movie

(CX)}

(AT actor

Nuart-theater

obj

...)} found

obj

...)

top-level-goal

...)}

FOICRI I IO K
Goal #{0B.2826: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (AT actor ...)
Subgoals of #{0B.1919: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS

top-level-goal
actor ...)...)}

...)} succeeds
completed

FOSS
II Hi K
Goal #{0B.2819: (ACTIVE-GOAL
Instantiating

Perform

external

Perform

action goal #{0B.1919:

succeeds

action

FEO
IIA
II
Goal #{0B.1919: (ACTIVE-GOAL
| I watch

(AT actor

plan

a movie

at the

After the LOVERS
TERTAINMENT
Theater.

(ACTIVE-GOAL
obj

(MTRANS

obj

(MTRANS

actor

...)...)

actor

...)...)}

succeeds

Nuart.

concern is terminated, processing shifts back to the EN-

concern

and DAYDREAMER

watches

a movie

at the Nuart

SOOO
IO I IOI
Reversal-theme

fired

as

inference

in

Cx.36

IF
THEN

NEG-EMOTION resulting from a FAILED-GOAL
activate daydreaming goal for REVERSAL of failure

JRO

I I Iekeaieakeakcakakakakakak

Activate top-level goal #{0B.2851: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj
#{CX.36: (CX)} --> #{CX.37: (CX)}
FESO
IOIIIK OK
Rationalization-theme fired as inference in Cx.36
IF

NEG-EMOTION

of sufficient

strength

resulting

(REVERSAL...)...)

from

a FAILED-GOAL
THEN

activate

daydreaming

2DAYDREAMER

goal

for

RATIONALIZATION

deactivates a goal if all episodes recalled for achieving that goal have a

negative desirability rating.

A.1.

LOVERS1

of

EXPERIENCE

319

failure

FIO
IO I IK
Activate top-level goal #{0B.2861: (ACTIVE-GOAL
FIO
RI IOK
Revenge-theme fired as inference in Cx.7
IF
THEN

obj

(RATIONALIZATION...)...)

NEG-EMOTION toward person resulting from a FAILED-GOAL
activate daydreaming goal to gain REVENGE against
person

Activate

top-level

goal #{0B.1889:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(REVENGE

obj

...)...)

FEI IK
Roving-theme

IF
THEN

fired

as

inference

in Cx.7

NEG-EMOTION of sufficient
a FAILED-GOAL
activate daydreaming goal

strength
for

resulting

from

ROVING

FIO
IORI IO AIC ACK

Activate

top-level

goal #{0B.1901:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(ROVING))

SRI
IR IR
Recovery-theme

IF
THEN

fired

as

goal

Lovers-theme

as

THEN

in Cx.3

NEG-EMOTION resulting from a FAILED-GOAL
activate daydreaming goal for RECOVERY of failure

FEO
ICC
Activate top-level
FEO
I IIR

IF

inference

fired

#{0B.1662:

inference

(ACTIVE-GOAL

LOVERS

(RECOVERY...)...)

in Cx.36

self not LOVERS with anyone and
SEX or LOVE-GIVING or LOVE-RECEIVING
below threshold
activate goal for

obj

with

or COMPANIONSHIP

a person

FA
II IIR

Activate
| I want

top-level goal #{0B.2872: (ACTIVE-GOAL
to be going out with someone.
interested

in going

out

with

obj

(LOVERS

actor

...)...)

| I feel

really

#{CX.36:

(CX)} --> #{CX.39:

someone.

Concerns:
#{0B.2872:
#{0B.2861:
#{0B.2851:
#{0B.1420:
#{0B.2412:
#{0B.1887:
#{0B.1901:

(ACTIVE-GOAL
(ACTIVE-GOAL
(ACTIVE-GOAL
(ACTIVE-GOAL
(ACTIVE-GCAL
(ACTIVE-GOAL
(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj
obj
obj
obj
obj
obj
obj

(LOVERS actor ...)...)} (0.9)
(RATIONALIZATION...)...)} (1.0059812499999996)
(REVERSAL...)...)} (1.0159812499999996)
(RATIONALIZATION...)...)} (0.97)
(REVERSAL...)...)} (0.98)
(ENTERTAINMENT...)...)} (0.6)
(ROVING...)...)} (0.96)

#{0B.1889:
#{0B.1662:

(ACTIVE-GOAL
(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj
obj

(REVENGE...)...)} (0.99)
(RECOVERY...)...)} (0.99)

(CX)}

The negative emotion of anger resulting from the personal goal failure activates the following daydreaming goals: RATIONALIZATION (rationalize being

TRACES FROM DAYDREAMER

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

320

turned down), ROVING (shift attention from the rejection to more pleasant
thoughts), REVENGE (imagine getting even with the movie star), REVERSAL
(plan to prevent similar rejections in the future), and RECOVERY (imagine
future scenarios in which DAYDREAMER becomes romantically involved with
Harrison). Since the LOVERS goal is still not achieved and the associated need
states are not satisfied, a fresh LOVERS goal—not associated with Harrison
Ford—is again activated.
FEO A IR I A CR
Ptrans-plan fired as plan

for #{0B.1916:
in Cx.36

IF
THEN

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj

(PTRANS

actor

...)...)}

Cx.39

goal for person to PTRANS to a location
subgoal for person to KNOW that location

FAI
A a aK
Goal #{0B.2901: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (KNOW actor ...)...)} succeeds
Subgoals of #{0B.1916: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (PTRANS actor ...)...)}
Perform

external

Perform

action goal #{0B.1916:

SA
Goal

completed

action

a ACK CK
#{0B.1916: (ACTIVE-GOAL

(ACTIVE-GOAL
obj

(PTRANS

obj

(PTRANS

actor

...)...)

actor

...)...)}

succeeds

| I go home.

AE

Ea

At-plan2

IF
THEN

Aa I aK aK
fired

as

inference

in Cx.39

person PTRANS from one location
person AT new location and
no longer AT old location

to another

Retracting dependencies
Retract 0b.1943 in Cx.39:

(AT actor

Me obj Nuart-location)

Retract

in Cx.39:

0b.1940

(PTRANS actor Me from Home to ...)
Subgoals of #{0B.1897: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (M-MOVIE actor ...)...)} completed
FEISS
IOI IO II II K
Goal #{0B.1897: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (M-MOVIE actor ...)...)} succeeds
Assert

O0b.2943

in Cx.39:

(M-MOVIE actor Me)
FEI IO IG A IOI III
Entertainment-inf.

IF

M-MOVIE

THEN

ENTERTAINMENT

fired

as

inference

need

satisfied

in Cx.39

BEISICIO SOI I I IIR IK
Goal

#{0B.1887:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

| I succeed

at being entertained.

Terminating

planning

for

top-level

Leaf context #{CX.39: (CX)}
[0B.1887: (SG. (ENTERTAINMENT

[0B.2942:

(ENTERTAINMENT...)...)}

succeeds

goal

strength

(SG. (M-MOVIE actor Me))]

(UPROC proc

’NEED-SATISFIED?)))]

A.2.

REVENGE1

DAYDREAM

[OB.1926:

(SG.

(AT actor

(0B.1939:

(SG.

(PTRANS

321

Nuart-theater

actor

obj Nuart-location))]

Me from Home

[0B.1935: (SG. (KNOW actor
(OB.2837: (SG. (MTRANS actor

to Nuart-location

obj Me))]

Me obj Nuart-location))]
Me from Nuart-theater to Me

obj (MOVIE)))]
[0B.2829: (SG. (AT actor Nuart-theater obj Nuart-location))]
[CB.2833: (SG. (AT actor Me obj Nuart-location))]
[0B.2907: (SG. (PTRANS actor Me from Nuart-location to Home obj Me))]
[OB.2903: (SG. (KNOW actor Me obj Home))]
Removing motivating
Emotional responses

| I feel

emotions

amused.

episode

Assess

scenario

(CX)}

in #{CX.39:

desirability

(ENTERTAINMENT...)...)

obj

(SUCCEEDED-GOAL

#{0B.1887:

Store

#{0B.1882:
(FAILED-GOAL obj (LOVERS actor ...)...)} (41.15)
#{0B.2403:
(FAILED-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} (0.95)
#{0B.1887:
(SUCCEEDED-GOAL obj (ENTERTAINMENT...)...)} (0.6)
Scenario desirability = -1.4999999999999996

Activate
Activate
Activate
Activate
Activate
Activate

index #{ENTERTAINMENT-PLANi: (RULE subgoal (M-MOVIE actor ...)...)}
index #{0B.2563: (MOVIES obj Movie-star1)}
index #{NUART-THEATER: (THEATER name "the Nuart")}
index #{MOVIE-STAR1: (MALE-ACTOR first-name "Harrison"...)}
index #{HOME: (LOCATION name "home")}
index #{NUART-LOCATION: (LOCATION name "the Nuart")}

#{CX.39:

(CX)} --> #{CX.40:

(CX)}

Concerns:
#{0B.2872:
(ACTIVE-GOAL obj (LOVERS actor ...)...)} (0.9)
#{0B.2861:
(ACTIVE-GOAL obj (RATIONALIZATION...)...)} (1.0059812499999996)
#{0B.2851:
(ACTIVE-GOAL obj (REVERSAL...)...)} (1.0159812499999996)
#{0B.1420:
(ACTIVE-GOAL obj (RATIONALIZATION...)...)} (0.97)
#{0B.2412:
(ACTIVE-GOAL obj (REVERSAL...)...)} (0.98)
No more goals to run; switching to daydreaming mode

State

changes

from PERFORMANCE

to DAYDREAMING

DAYDREAMER successfully completes her plan for M-MOVIE. This replenishes the ENTERTAINMENT need state and thus the ENTERTAINMENT personal goal succeeds. A positive emotion is activated and the concern is terminated. The experience is stored in episodic memory, along with its evaluation
of -1.5. All in all, this was not a positive experience for DAYDREAMER.

A.2

REVENGEI1

fired

THEN

obj

(REVENGE

as plan

for #{0B.1889: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.8 sprouting Cx.10
IF

(ACTIVE-GOAL

goal #{0B.1889:
(CX)}

Switching to new top-level
#{CX.8: (CX)} --> #{CX.10:
FAI
II IOI IC
Revenge-plani

Daydream

goal to gain REVENGE

obj

against

a failed

POS-RELATIONSHIP

subgoal

for person

to have

(REVENGE

obj

...)...)}

person

for

causing

self

goal
failure

of same

POS-RELATIONSHIP

obj ))}

#{CX.10:

(CX)} --> #{CX.11:

in Cx.10

sprouting

FROM DAYDREAMER

(CX)}

FESO
AI AK ACK
Failed-lovers-goal-plani fired as plan
for #{0B.1917: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE

IF
THEN

TRACES

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

322

actor

...)...)}

Cx.11

goal for person to have FAILED-GOAL of LOVERS
subgoal for person to have ACTIVE-GOAL of LOVERS
with
then

person and
BELIEVE that

person

does

not

have

ACTIVE-GOAL

of LOVERS

#{CX.11:

(CX)} --> #{CX.12:

(CX)}

FEI
IICR I IK
Lovers-theme-plan

for #{0B.1924:
in Cx.11
IF
THEN

fired

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj (BELIEVE actor

goal for self ACTIVE-GOAL of LOVERS with
subgoals for ROMANTIC-INTEREST in person
not LOVERS with anyone

#{CX.12:

(CX)} --> #{CX.13:

FAI
IO IR AAC ACK
Romantic-interest-plan4

for #{0B.1938:

fired

(ACTIVE-GOAL

as plan

obj

sprouting

Cx.13

IF

goal

to have

POS-ATTITUDE

self

is STAR

subgoal

for

person

(BELIEVE

toward

to be greater

Belief-pers-attr2
in Cx.14

fired

obj

STAR

(BELIEVE

(CX)}

for #{0B.2007:

obj

IF
THEN

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

#{CX.16: (CX)} --> #{CX.17:
AES OA
I II IK

for #{0B.2012:
in Cx.16

fired

...)...)}

actor

...)...)}

(STAR actor

...)...)}

to be an ACTOR

(CX)}

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

actor

Cx.16

goal for self to be a STAR
subgoal for self to M-STUDY

M-study-plan

and

Cx.15

#{CX.15: (CX)} --> #{CX.16:
AEC SAS
IG I KK
Star-plan fired as plan
in Cx.15

...)...)}

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

actor

a person

#{CX.13: (CX)} --> #{CX.14: (CX)}
FE
IO IO IR aK
Goal #{0B.1950: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE
#{CX.14: (CX)} --> #{CX.15: (CX)}
BES OSI
IOIKK
for #{0B.1959:

a person
and

(CX)}

in Cx.12

THEN

...)...)}

Cx.12

Cx.17

obj

(M-STUDY

actor

...)...)}

succeeds

A.2.

REVENGE1

DAYDREAM

323

AAI A AHA AAA AAA HAHA
Goal #{0B.2017: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (RTRUE)
top-level-goal ...)} succeeds
Subgoals of #{0B.2012: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (M-STUDY actor ...)...)} completed

IIIA
AIA AKI AA AAA ACK

Goal

#{0B.2012:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(M-STUDY

| I study to be an actor.
Subgoals of #{0B.2007: (ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

SA AAA AAA IAA IA AAA.

actor

...)...)}

(STAR actor

succeeds

...)...)}

Goal #{0B.2007: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (STAR actor ...)...)}
| I am a movie star even more famous than he is.
Subgoals of #{0B.1959: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor

completed

succeeds
...)...)}

completed

4A IAAI AIA HAA AAAI AK.
Goal
HAA

#{0B.1959:

KKK

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(BELIEVE

actor

...)...)}

succeeds

HeHeHt i HeHee HeHeHeHe

Subgoals

of

#{0B.1969:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

FAA IA IAAI A AAA AHA
Goal #{0B.1969: (ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

obj

(BELIEVE

(BELIEVE

actor

actor

...)...)}

...)...)}

completed

succeeds

Personal goal outcome
Emotional responses

| I feel pleased.
| He is interested

#{CX.17:

in me.

(CX)} --> #{CX.18:

(CX)}

4A IA IASI AIA AA IA IAA
Not-lovers-plani
for

#{0B.1964:

in Cx.17

fired

sprouting

M-break-up-plan2
#{0B.2088:

in Cx.18

obj

(BELIEVE

actor

...)...)}

Cx.18

#{CK.18: (CX)} -->
4A AAI AAA AAA. AIA.
for

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

#{CK.19:

fired

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

(CX)}

obj

(M-BREAK-UP...)...)}

Cx.19

HA AAAI IIIA ASA AIA
Goal #{0B.2093: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (RTRUE)
top-level-goal ...)} succeeds
Subgoals of #{0B.2088: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (M-BREAK-UP...)...)} completed
4A AH AAA AAA AH AAI
Goal #{0B.2088: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (M-BREAK-UP...)...)} succeeds
| He breaks up with his girlfriend.
4H AA AAAI.
AI AAA AHe
Not-lovers-plani

fired

as

inference

in Cx.19

Subgoals of #{0B.1964: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} completed
HA AA IA AAAI AAAS AAI A A
Goal #{0B.1964: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} succeeds
Subgoals of #{0B.1982: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} completed
HAA A AA HAA AAAS AA IA A
Goal #{0B.1982: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} succeeds
| He wants to be going out with me.

#{CX.19:

(CX)} --> #{CX.20:

(CX)}

SH AIHA SAI SAA AA IIA A
Believe-plan2

for #{0B.1975:
in Cx.19

IF

fired

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj

(BELIEVE

actor

...)...)}

Cx.20

goal for person

to BELIEVE

self

NOT mental

state

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

324

THEN

subgoal

#{CX.20:

to MTRANS

NOT mental

(CX)} --> #{CX.21:

state

TRACES FROM DAYDREAMER

to person

(CX)}

FAO
I IR II
Mtrans-plan2 fired as plan

for #{0B.2142:
in Cx.20
IF
THEN

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj

(MTRANS actor

goal to MTRANS mental state to person
subgoal to be VPROX that person

#{CX.21:

(CX)} --> #{CX.22:

(CX)}

#{CX.21:
#{CX.21:

(CX)} --> #{CX.23:
(CX)} --> #{CX.24:

(CX)}
(CX)}

Candidates: #{0B.1889:
FE
ICRAOR CR IK
Vprox-plan2

fired

for #{0B.2147:
in Cx.21
IF
THEN

...)...)}

Cx.21

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(REVENGE

obj

...)...)}

(1.2)

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj

(VPROX

actor

...)...)}

Cx.23

goal to be VPROX person
subgoal to M-PHONE person

#{CX.23:

(CX)} --> #{CX.25:

(CX)}

SE aK
M-phone-plani

fired

for #{0B.2160:
in Cx.23
IF
THEN

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

goal to M-PHONE
subgoal to KNOW

of #{0B.2160:

IF
THEN

fired

as

obj

actor

(KNOW actor

(ACTIVE-GOAL

FEO
OI IO III KK
Goal #{0B.2160: (ACTIVE-GOAL
| He calls me up.
FICS
IICR OK
Vprox-plan2

(M-PHONE

...)...)}

person
TELNO of person

FESO
IORI IC
Goal #{0B.2171: (ACTIVE-GOAL

Subgoals

obj

Cx.25

obj

inference

...)...)}

succeeds

obj

(M-PHONE

actor

...)...)}

(M-PHONE

actor

...)...)}

completed

succeeds

in Cx.25

M-PHONE person
VPROX person

Subgoals of #{0B.2147: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (VPROX actor ...)...)} completed
FOCI
OI IO IOI AIK
Goal #{0B.2147: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (VPROX actor ...)...)} succeeds
Subgoals of #{0B.2142: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS actor ...)...)} completed
AGI
FECA ISIC AIO
Goal #{0B.2142: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS actor ...)...)} succeeds
| I turn him down.
FESS IOI IOIIII OK
Believe-plan2
IF

MTRANS

fired

as

NOT mental

inference
state

in Cx.25

to person

A.3.

RATIONALIZATIONI

THEN

person

BELIEVE

self

DAYDREAM

NOT mental

325

state

Subgoals

of #{0B.1975: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} completed
IO II IIR
FOI
Goal #{0B.1975: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} succeeds
Subgoals of #{0B.1989: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} completed
FICO IK
Goal #{0B.1989: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} succeeds
Subgoals of #{0B.1889: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (REVENGE obj ...)...)} completed
FEC
CII K
Goal #{0B.1889: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (REVENGE obj ...)...)} succeeds
| I get even with him.
Emotional

response.

| I feel

pleased.

Terminating planning for top-level
Removing motivating emotions

Store

episode

#{CX.7:

#{0B.1889:

goal

(SUCCEEDED-GOAL

(CX)} --> #{CX.26:

obj

(REVENGE...)...)

(CX)}

The table-turning strategy for REVENGE involves causing a failure for the
other person similar to the one which that person caused for DAYDREAMER.
When the failed goal is one to form a positive relationship with the other person,
REVENGE is achieved when the other person experiences the failure of a goal
to form a similar relationship with DAYDREAMER.
In order for the movie star to experience a failure of the goal to form a

LOVERS relationship with DAYDREAMER, he must (a) have such a goal in the
first place, and (b) be turned down by her. In order for a person to have a goal
to form a LOVERS relationship with a second person, the first person must
have ROMANTIC-INTEREST in the second person and not be in a LOVERS
relationship with someone else. This rule is applied via backward other planning.
ROMANTIC-INTEREST in turn requires a POS-ATTITUDE. A rule states that
a movie star has a POS-ATTITUDE toward a person if that person is an even
greater star. A low-plausibility plan to become a star is to study to be an
actor. Once the movie star is imagined to be interested in DAYDREAMER, she
imagines turning him down. This results in a positive emotion. The daydreamed
episode is then stored in episodic memory for future use (in REVENGE2 and

REVENGE3).

A.3.
Switching

#{CX.6:
#{CX.6:

RATIONALIZATION1
to new top-level

goal #{0B.1420:

Daydream

(ACTIVE-GOAL

(CX)}
(CX)}

(CX)} --> #{CX.7:
(CX)} --> #{CX.8:

FIO
ICO I ICC
Rationalization-plani

fired

as

for #{0B.1420: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.6 sprouting Cx.7

obj

IF

goal

to RATIONALIZE

plan

failure

(RATIONALIZATION...)...)}

obj

(RATIONALIZATION)}

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

326

THEN

subgoal

#{CX.7:
FEO

for

imagined

success

(CX)} --> #{CX.9:

to LEADTO

TRACES FROM DAYDREAMER

failure

(CX)}

IOI IOI ICR I IC

Leadto-plani

coded

plan

for #{0B.1441: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.7 sprouting Cx.9

obj

(LEADTO

goal for success to LEADTO
hypothesize success and
explore consequences

failure

IF
THEN

| What

fired

if I were

as

ante

...)...)}

going out with him?

One way to rationalize the failure of a goal is to imagine that had the goal
succeeded, it would have resulted in a equal or worse goal failure. One way of
generating such a LEADTO scenario is to assert the succeeded goal in an alternative past context, and then apply inferences in that context in order to evaluate
the consequences of that success. If negative consequences (goal failures) are
found, positive emotions will be generated since this is an alternative past. Positive emotions will offset the original negative emotion resulting from failure
of the LOVERS goal. (Of course, if positive consequences are found, negative
emotions

will instead result.

In the current version of DAYDREAMER,

there

is no means of directing the outcome one way or another when this particular
plan for LEADTO is employed.)
FOR IARI

I I IOK

Other-rulei

IF
THEN

fired

as

inference

LOVERS with a person
initiate forward other

in

Cx.9

planning

for

person

FESO IOI III
ICI IK
Acting-job-theme

fired

IF

actor

not

THEN

activate

JO

does

a a a aka kk a

Activate

goal

as

have

inference
an

to have

in Cx.9

ACTING-EMPLOY

an ACTING-EMPLOY

KK kk ok

top-level

goal #{0B.1464:

for #{MOVIE-STAR1:
(MALE-ACTOR
| He would need work.

(ACTIVE-GOAL

first-name

obj

(ACTING-EMPLOY...)...)}

"Harrison"...)

The first consequence of the hypothesized goal success is that forward other
planning is initiated for the movie star. This is performed whenever DAYDREAMER is in a LOVERS relationship with another person in order to monitor the mental state of the other person. Once forward other planning begins,
the following further consequence is generated: the movie star will have the goal
to act in a movie.
#{CX.9:

(CX)}

-->

#{CX.10:

(CX)}

A.3.

RATIONALIZATIONI

Episodic

reminding

of #{EPISODE.1:

time

| I remember

the

FRI ISIOOI

IORIOK
fired

Episodic-rule.1

DAYDREAM

as

analogical

rule Episodic-rule.i...)}

Paramount

Pictures

in Cairo.

plan

(ACTING-EMPLOY...)...)}

for #{0B.1464: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj
in Cx.9 sprouting Cx.10
| He would have to be in Cairo.

#{CX.10:

(EPISODE

a job with

he had

327

(CX)}

(CX)} --> #{CX.11:

FACI IK
Rprox-plan

fired

for #{0B.1486:

sprouting

in Cx.10

IF
THEN

as plan

#{CX.11: (CX)} --> #{CX.12:
FAIS IOC
I KK
fired

actor

...)...)}

Cx.11

goal to be RPROX a city
subgoal to PTRANS1 to that

Ptransi-plan

(RPROX

obj

(ACTIVE-GOAL

city

(CX)}

as plan

for #{0B.1504: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (PTRANS1 actor ...)...)}
in Cx.11 sprouting Cx.12
ACR AIC ICR
FRI
top-level-goal ...)} succeeds
Goal #{0B.1525: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (RTRUE)
Subgoals of #{0B.1504: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (PTRANS1 actor ...)...)} completed
RACK
FOR
Goal #{0B.1504: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (PTRANS1 actor ...)...)} succeeds

| He would go to Cairo.
FA

IC

Rprox-plan
IF
THEN

I
fired

I KK
as

inference

in Cx.12

PTRANS1 from one city to another
RPROX new city and
no longer RPROX old city

FESO
I IORI IIR
Rprox-plan
IF
THEN

fired

as

inference

in Cx.12

PTRANS1 from one city to another
RPROX new city and
no longer RPROX old city

Forward other planning continues for the movie star: DAYDREAMER is reminded of a previous secondhand episode involving Harrison Ford—when he
had to go on location in Egypt to shoot a film. Through analogical planning, this episode is applied to the star’s current goal: he must be RPROX

(located in) Cairo to shoot another film. This in turn results in Harrison Ford’s

PTRANS1ing to Cairo.
FI
CIC IOC I IC
Lovers-p-goal fired
IF

LOVERS with
self is not

as

inference

person who
RPROX that

in Cx.12

is RPROX
city

one

city

and

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

328

THEN

activate

preservation

j Our relationship

would

goal

TRACES FROM DAYDREAMER

on LOVERS

be in trouble.

FEC
ICI II A

Goal #{0B.1486: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (RPROX actor ...)...)} succeeds
Subgoals of #{0B.1637: (SUCCEEDED-GOAL obj (RPROX...)...)} completed
Subgoals of #{0B.1464: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (ACTING-EMPLOY...)...)} completed
FEO
II III
Goal #{0B.1464: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (ACTING-EMPLOY...)...)} succeeds

#{CX.12:
#{CX.13:

(CX)} --> #{CX.13:
(CX)} --> #{CX.14:

(CX)}
(CX)}

SOO
I I II KK
Rprox-plan

fired

for #{0B.1688:
in Cx.13
IF
THEN

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj (RPROX actor

goal to be RPROX a city
subgoal to PTRANS1 to that

#{CX.14:
FEO

(CX)} --> #{CX.15:
IKK

Ptransi-plan

for #{0B.1694:
in Cx.14

fired

city

(CX)}

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

...)...)}

Cx.14

obj

(PTRANS1

actor

...)...)}

Cx.15

BUA OII RK
Goal #{0B.1699: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (RTRUE)
top-level-goal ...)} succeeds
Subgoals of #{0B.1694: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (PTRANS1 actor ...)...)} completed
FEO
RICK
Goal #{0B.1694: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (PTRANS1 actor ...)...)} succeeds
| I would go to Cairo.
FEISS
IIR IIHR
Rprox-plan

IF
THEN

fired

as

inference

in Cx.15

PTRANS1 from one city to another
RPROX new city and
no longer RPROX old city

The fact that the star is in Cairo and DAYDREAMER is in Los Angeles
results in the activation of a preservation goal on the LOVERS relationship.
Planning is then performed to undo the antecedents for this preservation goal—
in particular, the fact that DAYDREAMER is not RPROX the same city as the
star results in DAYDREAMER PTRANSIing to Cairo. (The other alternative
would is for the star to PTRANS1 back to Los Angeles—or not to go to Cairo

in the first place.)
FEO
IO IO II IOC
Job-failure fired as
IF

THEN

inference

in Cx.15

have EMPLOYMENT with organization
one city and
self is not RPROX that city
goal to have EMPLOYMENT fails

which

is RPROX

A.4.

RATIONALIZATION2 DAYDREAM

| I would

329

lose my job at May Company.

Personal goal outcome
Emotional responses

| I feel relieved.
FOO ICICI I ICICI IK

Goal

#{0B.1688:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(RPROX

actor

...)...)}

succeeds

However, since DAYDREAMER is no longer in Los Angeles, she loses her
job. Since this moderately important goal failure occurs in an alternative past,
it results in the positive emotion of relief. This positive emotion is diverted into
the original negative emotion, which loses some of its strength as a result. However, the strength of the negative emotion is still not below a certain threshold.
Therefore, another rationalization is sought.

A.4

RATIONALIZATION2

Attempting

to backtrack

for

top-level

#{0B.1420:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(RATIONALIZATION...)...)

Backtracking

to next

context

obj

Rationalization-plan2

as plan

for #{0B.1420:
in Cx.6
IF
THEN

fired

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

goal

of #{CX.8:

for #{0B.i420: (ACTIVE-GOAL
FEC
ICI

obj

(CX)}

(RATIONALIZATION...)...)}

(RATIONALIZATION...)...)}

Cx.8

goal to RATIONALIZE
subgoal for failure

failure
to LEADTO

success

#{CX.8: (CX)} --> #{CX.16: (CX)}
Episodic reminding of #{EPISODE.5:

(EPISODE

rule

| I remember
| Irving led

the time my being turned down by
to a success by being turned down

| him

to succeeding

leading

Daydream

at going

out

with

Episodic-rule.4...)}

by
Chris.

Another method for rationalization is to imagine future scenarios in which
the goal failure leads to an equal or more important goal success. An episode for
achieving this goal is recalled: the time DAYDREAMER went to a bar after being
turned down by Irving and ended up meeting Chris. Thus through analogical
planning, DAYDREAMER imagines going to a bar and meeting someone:
FOCI
ICAI IK
Episodic-rule.4

fired

for #{0B.1448:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

in Cx.8

#{CX.16:

sprouting

as

analogical

obj

plan

(LEADTO

ante

...)...)}

Cx.16

(CX)} --> #{CX.17:

(CX)}

Apply existing analogical plan
FOIA IA
AI AAC
Episodic-rule.3 fired as analogical plan
for #{0B.1769: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (LEADTO ante
in Cx.16 sprouting Cx.17

...)...)}

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

330

#{CX.17:
Apply

(CX)} --> #{CX.18:

existing

analogical

TRACES FROM DAYDREAMER

(CX)}
plan

FEI
IO IC II
Episodic-rule.2

fired

for #{0B.1776:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

as

analogical

in Cx.17 sprouting Cx.18
Apply existing analogical

obj

plan

(LOVERS actor

...)...)}

plan

FES
IS II KK
At-plan2

fired

as analogical

plan

for #{0B.1781:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

in Cx.18
IF
THEN

sprouting

goal to be AT a location
subgoal to PTRANS to that

#{CX.19:

(CX)} --> #{CX.20:

FEO
I IC IKK
Ptrans-plan fired as plan
for #{0B.1789: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.19

IF
THEN

sprouting

(AT actor

...)

top-level-goal

...)}

Cx.19

location

(CX)}
obj

(PTRANS

actor

...)...)}

Cx.20

goal for person to PTRANS to a location
subgoal for person to KNOW that location

FEO

IOI

IK

Goal #{0B.1794: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (KNOW actor ...)...)} succeeds
Subgoals of #{0B.1789: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (PTRANS actor ...)...)}

FEO
II AIK
Goal #{0B.1789: (ACTIVE-GOAL
| I go to Mom’s.

obj

(PTRANS

actor

...)...)}

completed

succeeds

Personal goal outcome
Emotional responses

| I feel pleased.
| I am going out with him.

Generating an imaginary future scenario in which the DAYDREAMER meets
someone (Chris or someone similar) at a bar results in the imagined future
success of the LOVERS goal and corresponding positive emotion.
emotion is diverted into the original negative emotion.

A.56

RATIONALIZATION3

Daydream

FEO
IOI III IK
Rationalization-plan3

for #{0B.1420:
in Cx.19
IF
THEN
2

2

fired

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

Cx.110

goal to RATIONALIZE
subgoal to MINIMIZE
ke ka

ake2 a a ieaiea oeae2k

as plan

obj

failure
failure

(RATIONALIZATION...)...)}

This positive

A.5.

RATIONALIZATION3 DAYDREAM

Minimization-plan

as

coded

plan

for #{0B.5356: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.110 sprouting Cx.111

obj

(MINIMIZATION...)...)}

IF

goal for MINIMIZATION

of failure

THEN

negate

| Anyway,

and

I was

fired

331

justify
well

antecedents

dressed

of failure

because

I was

wearing

a necklace.

| I feel less embarrassed.
| Anyway,

I do not

think

much

of Harrison

Ford.

| I feel less embarrassed.
FEAR
IC IO IK
Rationalization-inf1

fired

as

inference

in Cx.ili

IF

NEG-EMOTION associated with failure less than a
certain strength or POS-EMOTION associated with
failure

THEN

RATIONALIZATION

of failure

| I rationalize being turned
FEI
CICK
Goal #{0B.1420: (ACTIVE-GOAL
Terminating

planning

for

down

by him.

obj

(RATIONALIZATION...)...)}

top-level

#{0B.1420: (SUCCEEDED-GOAL obj
Leaf context #{CX.21: (CX)}

succeeds

goal

(RATIONALIZATION...)...)}

(OB. 1420:
(SG.

(RATIONALIZATION

obj (FAILED-GOAL

obj

(LOVERS actor Me Movie-star1))))]

(0OB.1855: (SG. (LEADTO ante (FAILED-GOAL obj (LOVERS actor Me Movie-star1))
conseq (SUCCEEDED-GOAL)))]
([0B.1845: (SG. (LEADTO ante (FAILED-GOAL obj (LOVERS actor Me Movie-star1))
conseq (SUCCEEDED-GOAL obj (LOVERS actor Me Chris))))]
(OB.1820: (SG. (LOVERS actor Me Chris))]
[0B.1810: (SG. (AT actor Me obj Bari-loc))]
[0B.1800: (SG. (PTRANS actor Me from Home to Bari-loc obj Me))]
[0B.1796: (SG. (KNOW actor Me obj Bari-loc))]
([0B.1817: (SG. (AT actor Chris obj Bari-loc))]
Leaf context #{CX.15: (CX)}
(OB.1420:
(SG. (RATIONALIZATION obj (FAILED-GOAL obj (LOVERS actor Me Movie-star1))))]
([0B.1441: (AG. (LEADTO ante (SUCCEEDED-GOAL obj (LOVERS actor Me Movie-star1))
conseq (FAILED-GOAL)))]

Leaf

[0B.1452:

(SG. (RTRUE))]

context

#{CX.111:

(0B.1420:

(SG.

[0B.5356:

(AG.

(CX)}

(RATIONALIZATION

obj

(FAILED-GOAL

top-level-goal

...)))]

(MINIMIZATION

obj

obj

(FAILED-GOAL

obj
obj

(BELIEVE actor Movie-star1
(POS-ATTITUDE obj Me))
(BELIEVE

obj (POS-ATTITUDE
top-level-goal ...))]

[0B.5360:

actor

Movie-star1

obj Me))

(SG. (RTRUE))]

Removing motivating emotions of
#{0B.1420: (SUCCEEDED-GOAL obj (RATIONALIZATION...)...)
Store episode #{0B.1420: (SUCCEEDED-GOAL obj (RATIONALIZATION...)...)

FROM DAYDREAMER

TRACES

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

332

DAYDREAMER attempts to rationalize her early embarrassment in front of
the movie star. The minimization strategy for rationalization involves finding
antecedents of the failure; if an antecedent is an attitude, the opposite attitude
is asserted, otherwise reasoning chains for the negation of the antecedent are
highlighted. In this case, an antecedent for embarrassment in front of someone
is that one has a positive attitude toward that person. This attitude is negated,
resulting in a reduction of the strength of the resulting embarrassment emotion.
Another antecedent is that DAYDREAMER was not well dressed. However, a
low realism inference was already made that DAYDREAMER was well dressed
because she was wearing a nice necklace. This antecedent is thus negated and
the strength of the resulting embarrassment further reduced.
Now the strength of the negative emotion is below the necessary threshold
and the RATIONALIZATION daydreaming goal succeeds. The various planning
episodes are stored in episodic memory for possible future use.

A.6

ROVING1

Switching

to new top-level

#{CX.9:

(CX)}

-->

FOI

IO

IK

Roving-plani

fired

for #{0B.1901:
in Cx.9
IF
THEN

Daydream
goal #{0B.1901:

#{CX.27:

(CX)}

as

coded

plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

sprouting

(ROVING)

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

top-level-goal

(ROVING)

...)}

...)}

Cx.27

daydreaming goal for ROVING
recall pleasant episode

Episodic

reminding

| I remember

of #{EPISODE.1:

the time

Steve

told

(EPISODE
me

rule

he thought

Induced-rule.1i...)}

I was

wonderful

| at Gulliver’s.
Activate index #{INDUCED-RULE.1: (RULE subgoal (RSEQ obj (MTRANS...)
Activate index #{GULLIVERS: (RESTAURANT name "Gulliver’s")}
Activate index #{MARINA: (CITY name "the Marina")}
Activate index #{STEVE1: (MALE-PERSON first-name "Steve"...)}
| I feel pleased.

...)...)}

The plan for the ROVING daydreaming goal is to retrieve a random episode
associated with a strong positive emotion. Here a pleasant episode at Gulliver’s
restaurant, located in Marina del Rey, is recalled, and the associated positive
emotion is reactivated.
Episodic

reminding

! I remember

the

of #{EPISODE.2:

time

(EPISODE

rule

Induced-rule.2...)}

I had a job in the Marina.

Activate

index

#{INDUCED-RULE.2:

Activate

index

#{0B.1829:

(RULE subgoal

(RPROX

actor

...)

goal

...)}

(EMPLOYMENT)}

Index #{MARINA: (CITY name "the Marina")} already active
Activate index #{VENICE: (CITY name "Venice Beach")}
Index #{INDUCED-RULE.1: (RULE subgoal (RSEQ obj (MTRANS...) ...)...)}
Episodic reminding of #{EPISODE.3: (EPISODE rule Induced-rule.3...)}

fades

A.7.

RECOVERY2 DAYDREAM

| I remember

the

time

Steve

and

333

I bought

sunglasses

in

| Venice Beach.
Activate index #{INDUCED-RULE.3: (RULE subgoal (RPROX actor ...)
goal ...)}
Index #{VENICE: (CITY name "Venice Beach")} already active
Subgoals of #{0B.1901: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (ROVING)
top-level-goal ...)} completed
FIO
A IOI
Goal #{0B.1901: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (ROVING)
top-level-goal ...)} succeeds
Terminating planning for top-level goal
#{0B.1901:
(SUCCEEDED-GOAL obj (ROVING...)...)}
Removing motivating emotions
#{CX.26: (CX)} --> #{CX.28:
(CX)}

Whenever an episode is retrieved via some of its indices, its remaining indices
are activated. (The number of indices required for the retrieval of an episode
depends on the episode. Some may be retrieved using only one index; others
require several indices to be active before they can be retrieved.) The Gulliver’s
episode is indexed under Marina del Rey and so this index is activated. This
index is sufficient to result in the recall of a job DAYDREAMER once had in
Marina del Rey. Venice, which is near Marina del Rey, is another index for
this second episode and so it is activated. The active indices of Venice and
Peter together result in the retrieval of an episode involving both. (Retrieval
of episodes involving more than one index is accomplished through a one-level
intersection search.)

A.7

RECOVERY2

Switching to new top-level
FFA ITA AAA TOA AAA A
Recovery-plan

fired

for #{0B.1662:
in Cx.4

IF
THEN

as

goal #{0B.1662:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(RECOVERY...)...)}

plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

Daydream

obj

(RECOVERY...)...)}

Cx.5

goal for RECOVERY from a LOVERS failure
subgoal to ask out person again

| I have

to

ask

him

out.

In general, to achieve RECOVERY of a failed LOVERS goal, one must imagine ways of achieving that same LOVERS goal in the future. After LOVERS1,
DAYDREAMER considers possible ways to go out with the movie star in the
future. For simplicity, instead of generating an entire future plan for achieving
the LOVERS goal (which is demonstrated by other traces), only the problem of
contacting the movie star to ask him out is considered here.
FOIA IATA AOIATA HHA A A
Mtrans-plan2

fired

as plan

for #{0B.1711: (ACTIVE-GOAL
obj (MTRANS
in Cx.5 sprouting Cx.6

actor

...)...)}

IF
THEN

TRACES FROM DAYDREAMER

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

334

goal to MTRANS mental state to person
subgoal to be VPROX that person

FAI
I IC I
Vprox-plan2

fired

for #{0B.1716:
in Cx.6

IF
THEN

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj

(VPROX actor

goal to be VPROX person
subgoal to M-PHONE person

| I have to call him.
FEIO II ACK
M-phone-plani fired as plan
for #{0B.1729: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj
in Cx.8 sprouting Cx.9
IF
THEN

...)...)}

Cx.8

goal to M-PHONE
subgoal to KNOW

| I have

to know

his

(M-PHONE

actor

...)...)}

person
TELNO of person
telephone

number.

FOI
IR IAC
Know-plan2 fired as plan

for #{0B.1735:
in Cx.9
IF
THEN

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj

(KNOW actor

goal for person to KNOW TELNO
subgoal for someone to MTRANS

| He has

to tell

...)...)}

Cx.10

me his

telephone

of another
TELNO from

to that

person

number.

FEO I IIIIAK
Mtrans-plani

fired

as

plan

for #{0B.1741: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.10 sprouting Cx.11
IF
THEN

obj

(MTRANS

actor

...)...)}

goal for person2 to MTRANS info from object to personi
subgoals for object to KNOW info and
for personi to be VPROX person2 and
for person2 to be VPROX object and
for person2 to BELIEVE that personl has ACTIVE-GOAL
to KNOW info and
for person2 to have ACTIVE-GOAL for personi to KNOW
info

Attempting

to backtrack

for

top-level

goal

#{0B.1662: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (RECOVERY...)...)
Top-level goal #{0B.1662: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (RECOVERY...)...)}

All possibilities

failed for #{0B.1662:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

fails

(RECOVERY...)...)

DAYDREAMER fails to generate a scenario of high realism in which she is
able to get in touch with the movie star. Therefore, DAYDREAMER attempts
to generate mutations of failed action goals which might enable her to get in
touch with the star:

A.7.

RECOVERY2 DAYDREAM

Action mutations for #{0B.1662:
Mutating action goal #{0B.1741:

(ACTIVE-GOAL
(ACTIVE-GOAL
telephone

his

else

someone

he tells

| Suppose

335

obj
obj

(RECOVERY...)...)}
(MTRANS actor ...)...)}

number.

Serendipity!! (daydreaming goal)
[0B.1989: (AG. (KNOW actor Me
obj (TELNO actor Movie-star1))) EPISODE.7]
[OB.2041: (AG. (MTRANS actor ?Person6 from ?Person6

to Me

obj (TELNO actor Movie-star1))) EPISODE.8]
[OB.2052: (AG. (KNOW actor ?Person6
obj (TELNO actor Movie-stari))) EPISODE.9]
[OB.2058: (AG. (MTRANS actor Movie-star1 from Movie-stari
obj (TELNO actor Movie-star1)))]
[0B.2035: (AG. (BELIEVE actor ?Person6
obj (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (KNOW actor Me
obj (TELNO actor Movie-star1)))))]
[0B.2028: (AG. (BELIEVE actor ?Person6
obj (BELIEVE actor Me
obj (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (KNOW actor Me

to ?Person6

obj (TELNO actor Movie-stari))))))]
Me ?Person6))]
?Person6 ?Person6)) ]

[0B.2025: (AG. (VPROX actor
[0B.2022: (AG. (VPROX actor
| What do you know!
existing

Apply

plan

analogical

FEC OCI IKK
Know-plan3
in Cx.26
IF
THEN

as

fired

for #{0B.2063:

analogical

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

plan

obj

(KNOW actor

goai for person to KNOW TELNO
subgoal for someone to MTRANS

| This

person

has

...)...)}

Cx.27

to tell

me

his

of another
TELNO from

telephone

to that

person

number.

The action “he tells me his telephone number” is mutated into “he tells
someone else his telephone number.” The serendipity mechanism detects that
this mutated action is applicable to the goal of finding out the star’s telephone
number: If the star tells someone else his number, this other person will know his
number, who can then tell it to DAYDREAMER. Next, the planning mechanism
fleshes out this possibility. In particular, a value for the variable which represents
the other person must be found. Initially, DAYDREAMER proceeds by analogy
to the episode produced as a suggestion by the serendipity mechanism:
Apply

existing

FE

Mtrans-plani

for #{0B.2090:
in Cx.27

IF
THEN

analogical

plan

IORI II CK
fired

as

analogical

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj

plan

(MTRANS

actor

...)...)}

Cx.28

goal for person2 to MTRANS info from object to person1
subgoals for object to KNOW info and
for personi to be VPROX person2 and
for person2 to be VPROX object and
for person2 to BELIEVE that personi has ACTIVE-GOAL

TRACES FROM DAYDREAMER

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

336

to KNOW info and
for person2 to have
info

ACTIVE-GOAL

existing

plan

Apply

analogical

for

personi

to KNOW

FEAR
I Ia A aKK
Know-plan2

fired

for #{0B.2095:
in Cx.28
IF
THEN

as analogical

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

goal for person to KNOW TELNO
subgoal for someone to MTRANS

| He has

to tell

bd (#{0B.1403:
ICRI KR

Mtrans-plani
in Cx.29

this

fired

for #{0B.2118:

...)...)}

his

of another
TELNO from

telephone

(KNOW actor

to that

person

number.

Movie-star1

obj

...)}

as plan

sprouting

obj

(MTRANS

actor

...)...)}

Cx.30

goal for person2 to MTRANS info from object to personi
subgoals for object to KNOW info and
for personi to be VPROX person2 and
for person2 to be VPROX object and
for person2 to BELIEVE that personi has ACTIVE-GOAL
to KNOW info and
for person2 to have ACTIVE-GOAL for personi to KNOW
info

IORI

Jiffy-rulei

fired

for #{0B.2187:
in Cx.30

R
as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

another

subgoal

person

| He has

to want

(BELIEVE

actor

...)...)}

to have

ACTIVE-GOAL

to KNOW

TELN

person

for person

with

obj

Cx.31

goal for person
of

THEN

person

(ACTIVE-GOAL

FAI

IF

(KNOW actor

Cx.29

Non-empty
FEO

IF
THEN

plan

obj

to have

to be going

out

ACTIVE-GOAL

of LOVERS

with

person.

this

FEISS
IO IIA II AK
Lovers-theme-plan

for #{0B.2298:
in Cx.31

IF
THEN

fired

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj (BELIEVE actor

goal for self ACTIVE-GOAL of LOVERS with
subgoals for ROMANTIC-INTEREST in person
not LOVERS with anyone

| He has
| He has

...)...)}

Cx.32

to be interested in this person.
to believe that he is not going out

a person
and

with

anyone.

FOSS
IORI CK
Romantic-interest-plan

fired

for #{0B.2397: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.32 sprouting Cx.33

as plan

obj

(BELIEVE

actor

...)...)}

(PERSON6...))

A.7.

RECOVERY2 DAYDREAM

IF
THEN

goal to have ROMANTIC-INTEREST in person
subgoal to have POS-ATTITUDE toward person
person to be ATTRACTIVE

| He has

to believe

that

this

person

337

and

is attractive.

In order for the star to tell someone else his number, he must have the goal for
the other person to know his number. The following rule is employed here: One
has the goal to tell someone else one’s number if one has the goal to go out with
that person. Other rules (such as having the goal to give someone one’s number
when one wants a job from that person) would lead to other daydreams. In
order for the star to have the goal to go out with this unknown person, he must
be interested in her. Thus he must have a positive attitude toward this person
and she must be attractive. A suitable value for the variable representing this
unknown person is therefore DAYDREAMER’s rich and attractive friend Karen:
Porte
ort tft ee te
Belief-pers-attr3

fired

as plan

for #{0B.2513: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.33 sprouting Cx.34

Fact plan #{0B.1606:

that

(BELIEVE

(ATTRACTIVE

SE
CK
Subgoals of #{0B.2640:
FEO
II ICR
| He believes

obj

obj Karen)}

(ACTIVE-GOAL

Karen

of #{0B.2742: (ACTIVE-GOAL
FEC
IO AIO
| He is interested in her.
FACIR II
#{0B.2645:

in Cx.37

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj

...)...)}

found

(BELIEVE

actor

...)...)}

completed

(BELIEVE

actor

...)...)}

completed

actor

...)...)}

is attractive.

Subgoals

for

actor

obj

obj

(BELIEVE

Cx.38

FESO
IO II I AK
M-break-up-plan2
for

#{0B.2842:

in Cx.38

fired

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj

(M-BREAK-UP...)...)}

Cx.39

SEI
III I I KK
Subgoals of #{0B.2842: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (M-BREAK-UP...)...)} completed
FEI
I A IIR
| He breaks up with his girlfriend.
FESO
AOR AIK
Subgoals of #{0B.2869: (SUCCEEDED-GOAL obj (BELIEVE...)...)} completed
Subgoals of #{0B.2650: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} completed
Etetr
oreo rore Let
| He wants to be going out with her.
FESO IIA III IK
Jiffy-rule1

IF
THEN

person
person

fired

as

inference

in Cx.39

to have ACTIVE-GOAL of LOVERS with person
have ACTIVE-GOAL to KNOW TELNO of person

FORO
IO AC
I KO aK

TRACES FROM DAYDREAMER

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

338

Activate

| He wants

Subgoals
FES

her

(MALE-ACTOR

to know

her his

first-name

telephone

his

of #{0B.2674:
ICICI CK

| He tells

(ACTIVE-GOAL

goal #{0B.2884:

top-level

for #{MOVIE-STAR1:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(KNOW actor

...)...)}

"Harrison"...)

number.

obj

telephone

number.

inference

in Cx.43

(MTRANS

actor

...)...)}

completed

FAI
IIII IC
Know-plan3

fired

as

FAIR

ACK

Believe-plani

fired

IF
THEN

MTRANS
person

as

inference

mental state
BELIEVE self

A

to person
mental state

IO IK

Enable-future-vprox-plani
IF
THEN

in Cx.43

personi
personi
person2

fired

as

inference

in Cx.43

KNOW TELNO of person2
and
ENABLE-FUTURE-VPROX

Karen asks the movie star for his telephone number, and he gives it to her.
Now DAYDREAMER must get the telephone number from Karen:
FAO
IO IC IK
Subgoals of #{0B.3005: (SUCCEEDED-GOAL obj (KNOW actor ...)...)} completed
Subgoal relaxation, #{0B.2716: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} succeeds
FEO
I ROR ok
Believe-plani

fired

for #{0B.2722:
in Cx.44

IF
THEN

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj

(BELIEVE

actor

...)...)}

Cx.45

goal for person to BELIEVE self mental state
subgoal to MTRANS mental state to person

| I have

to tell

her

that

I want

to know

his

telephone

obj

(MTRANS

actor

...)...)}

JE
I II IKK
Mtrans-plan2

fired

for #{0B.3022:
in Cx.45
IF
THEN

sprouting

Cx.46

goal to MTRANS mental state to person
subgoal to be VPROX that person

FEISS

III II OK

Vprox-plan2

fired

for #{0B.3027:
in Cx.46
IF
THEN

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj (VPROX actor

Cx.48

goal to be VPROX person
subgoal to M-PHONE person

RIOR I ROR I keaka aieakeakaeaieae2k

...)...)}

number.

A.7.

RECOVERY2 DAYDREAM

M-phone-plani

fired

as plan

for #{0B.3040: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.48 sprouting Cx.49
IF

goal

THEN

subgoal

to M-PHONE

FESO
IO IC IC IK
Subgoals of #{0B.3040:
BESS III
IK
| I call her.
FEISS
III IK

IF
THEN

fired

obj

(M-PHONE

actor

...)...)}

(M-PHONE

actor

person

to KNOW TELNO

Vprox-plan2

339

as

of person

(ACTIVE-GOAL

inference

obj

...)...)}

completed

in Cx.49

M-PHONE person
VPROX person

FEI
IC
IK
Subgoals of #{0B.3072:
FCI
II IOK
Subgoals of #{0B.3022:
SEG
RIK
| I tell

her

that

(SUCCEEDED-GOAL

obj

(ACTIVE-GOAL

(MTRANS

actor

telephone

number.

I want

to know

obj

his

(VPROX...)...)}

completed

...)...)}

completed

FEI
I I
Believe-plani
IF
THEN

MTRANS
person

fired

as

inference

mental state
BELIEVE self

in Cx.49

to person
mental state

FEIG ICI I IKak
Subgoals of #{0B.3104:
FAO
II
ACR

(SUCCEEDED-GOAL

Vprox-reflexivity

as plan

fired

obj

(BELIEVE...)...)}

completed

for #{0B.2732: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (VPROX actor ...)...)}
in Cx.49 sprouting Cx.50
FEI
IO II
Subgoals of #{0B.2732: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (VPROX actor ...)...)}
FEC
IRI IIR

Subgoals

of #{0B.2702:

FE

IO

| She

(ACTIVE-GOAL

tells

me

his

telephone

FAI
IOC II
Know-plan3 fired as inference
FEI
IO II IIIIR
Believe-plani

IF
THEN

MTRANS
person

obj

(MTRANS

actor

IO IIR

fired

as

number.

in Cx.50

inference

mental state
BELIEVE self

in Cx.50

to person
mental state

FEC
II IIR
Enable-future-vprox-plani

IF
THEN

personi
personi

person2

fired

as

KNOW TELNO of person2
and
ENABLE-FUTURE-VPROX

inference

in Cx.50

...)...)}

completed

completed

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

340

FE IAC
Mtrans-acceptable-inf3
IF
THEN

fired

as

inference

other MTRANS anything to self
MTRANS-ACCEPTABLE between self
other

TRACES FROM DAYDREAMER

in Cx.50

and

DAYDREAMER calls Karen and gets the star’s number.
him and ask him out:
FEBS IAI
OI IIK
Subgoals of #{0B.3166:
Subgoals of #{0B.2693:
AEGIS AICOIOI
ieiecaliehim:.
FEC
OIA II IO K
Vprox-plan2
IF
THEN

fired

as

(SUCCEEDED-GOAL obj (KNOW actor
(ACTIVE-GOAL obj (M-PHONE actor

inference

completed
completed

in Cx.50

M-PHONE person
VPROX person

etter
ier err etS tet,
Subgoals of #{0B.3191:
Subgoals of #{0B.2683:
SESS
IAII IK
| I ask him out.
FEI IIR
Believe-plani
IF
THEN

...)...)}
...)...)}

Now she can call

MTRANS
person

Subgoals
FEC

fired

(SUCCEEDED-GOAL obj (VPROX...)...)} completed
(ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS actor ...)...)} completed

as

inference

mental state
BELIEVE self

of #{0B.1662:
IAI K

Terminating

planning

Leaf

#{CX.50:

context

in Cx.50

to person
mental state

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

for top-level

goal

(RECOVERY...)...)}

completed

(CX)}

(OB. 1662:

(SG. (RECOVERY obj (FAILED-GOAL obj (LOVERS actor Me Movie-stari))))]
(OB.3196: (SG. (MTRANS actor Me from Me to Movie-stari
obj (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (LOVERS actor Me Movie-star1))))]
(0B.3191: (SG. (VPROX actor Movie-stari Me))]
(OB.3172: (SG. (M-PHONE actor Me to Movie-star1))]
(OB.3166: (SG. (KNOW actor Me
obj (TELNO actor Movie-star1)))]
(0B.3125: (SG. (MTRANS actor Karen from Karen to Me
obj

(TELNO

actor

([0B.3005:

obj

(TELNO

Movie-star1)))]

(SG.

actor

(KNOW

actor

Karen

Movie-star1)))]

[OB
.2969:
(SG.

(MTRANS

actor Movie-star1

from Movie-stari

obj
obj

(TELNO actor Movie-star1)))]
(OB.2657: (SG. (KNOW actor
(TELNO actor Movie-star1)))]

Movie-star1

to Karen

A.7.

RECOVERY2

obj

DAYDREAM

([0B.2900:

(SG.

(BELIEVE

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(KNOW actor

[0B.2876:

obj

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

obj

(LOVERS
(SG.

actor Movie-stari

(BELIEVE

actor

obj

Karen)))]

[0B.2759:

(SG.

(BELIEVE

(ATTRACTIVE

(POS-ATTITUDE

(SG.

(SG.

obj

(RICH actor

actor

Movie-star1

(ATTRACTIVE

(BELIEVE

obj

actor

Karen))]

Movie-stari

obj Karen)))]

[OB.2806:

(RICH actor

Karen))))]

Movie-stari

obj Karen)))]
(0B.2755:

obj

Movie-star1i

Karen

(ROMANTIC-INTEREST

([0B.2825:

obj

actor

obj (TELNO actor Movie-star1)))))]
(BELIEVE actor Movie-stari

(SG.

[0B.2831:
obj

341

(SG.

(BELIEVE

actor

Movie-star1

(BELIEVE

actor

Movie-stari

Movie-stari)))]
[0B.2820:

(SG.

Karen)))]

[OB.2816: (SG. (RICH actor Karen))]
[OB.2869: (SG. (BELIEVE actor Movie-star1

obj

(NOT obj

(LOVERS

actor

[0OB.2852:

[0B.2849:
[0B.2948:

obj

(BELIEVE

Movie-star1))))]

(SG.

(SG.

(RTRUE))]

(BELIEVE

actor

actor

Movie-star1))]

Movie-stari

actor Karen
obj (ACTIVE-GOAL

obj (KNOW actor Karen
(TELNO actor Movie-star1))))))]

obj
[OB.2927:

obj

(M-BREAK-UP

(SG.

(ACTIVE-GOAL

(SG.

obj

(MTRANS

actor

(KNOW actor

Karen

Karen

from

Karen

to Movie-star1i

obj (TELNO actor Movie-star1)))))]
[0B.2920: (SG. (VPROX actor Movie-stari Karen)
)]
(0OB.2923: (SG. (VPROX actor Karen Movie-star1))]
(OB.2965: (SG. (VPROX actor Movie-star1 Movie-star1))]

[OB.2962:
[0B.3013:

obj

obj

(SG.

(SG.

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

[0B.3104:

(SG.

(BELIEVE

actor
obj

(RTRUE))]

(BELIEVE

actor

Me

obj (TELNO actor
actor Karen

(BELIEVE

Movie-star1)))))]

Me
(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj
obj

Karen

(KNOW actor

obj

(TELNO

(0B.3081:

(SG.

(MTRANS

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(KNOW

(KNOW

actor

actor

actor

obj

actor

Me

Movie-star1))))))]

Me from

Me to Karen

Me

(TELNO actor Movie-star1)))))]

(0B.3072: (SG. (VPROX actor Karen Me))]
[0B.3053: (SG. (M-PHONE actor Me to Karen))]
[0B.3048:

obj

[0B.3077:
[0B.3121:

(SG.
(SG.

(0B.3118:

Removing

Store

(SG.

(KNOW

actor

Me

(TELNO actor Karen) ))]

motivating

episode

(SG.

(VPROX
(VPROX

actor
actor

Me Karen))]
Karen Karen)
)]

(RTRUE))]

emotions

#{0B.1662:

(SUCCEEDED-GOAL

obj

(RECOVERY...)...)

A.8
FIO

RECOVERY3
I

III

Daydream

I IK

Entertainment-theme

fired

as

inference
threshold

IF

ENTERTAINMENT

need

below

THEN

activate

for

ENTERTAINMENT

goal

FAO
IIR II I CIC
Activate top-level goal #{0B.1835:
| I want to be entertained.
| I feel

interested

in being

in Cx.4

(ACTIVE-GOAL

goal #{0B.1835:

Entertainment-plan2

as plan

for #{0B.1835:
in Cx.4

fired

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj

(ENTERTAINMENT...)...)

entertained.

Switching to new top-level
SEO
II
IC

IF
THEN

TRACES FROM DAYDREAMER

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

342

obj

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(ENTERTAINMENT)}

(ENTERTAINMENT...)...)}

Cx.7

goal for ENTERTAINMENT
subgoal to MTRANS mail

The level of satisfaction of DAYDREAMER’s need for entertainment has
again fallen below the threshold, and so an ENTERTAINMENT goal is activated. This time, DAYDREAMER selects the plan of getting and reading the
mail.
FEO
ORI II IK
Poss-plan2

fired

for #{0B.1857:
in Cx.7

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

IF

goal

THEN

subgoal

obj

(POSS actor

...)...)}

Cx.8

for person

to POSS

object

to GRAB object

FEI
I III IK
Grab-plan

fired

for #{0B.1880:
in Cx.8
IF
THEN

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj

(GRAB actor

...)...)}

Cx.9

goal to GRAB object
subgoal to be AT location

of object

Fact

plan #{0B.528: (AT actor Maili obj Outside)} found
JESS
GIOIAOIIII IK
Goal #{0B.1902: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (AT actor ...)
top-level-goai

...)}

FEI OIC CIO IOIIO IO IK
At-plan2

fired

for #{0B.1909:
in Cx.10
IF
THEN

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj

(AT actor

Cx.11

goal to be AT a location
subgoal to PTRANS to that

location

...)

top-level-goal

...)}

succeeds

A.8.

RECOVERY3 DAYDREAM

343

FAIAII OK
Ptrans-plan

fired

for #{0B.1938:
in Cx.11
IF
THEN

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL obj (PTRANS actor

sprouting

...)...)}

Cx.12

goal for person to PTRANS to a location
subgoal for person to KNOW that location

FE
IG aI
Goal #{0B.1943: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (KNOW actor ...)...)} succeeds
Subgoals of #{0B.1938: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (PTRANS actor ...)...)} completed
Current top-level goal waits #{0B.1835: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (ENTERTAINMENT...)...)}
No more

goals

to run;

switching

to performance

Waking up top-level

goal #{0B.1835:

State

DAYDREAMING

changes

from

Subgoals

of #{0B.1938:

Perform

external

Believe-believe-inf

(ACTIVE-GOAL

fired

obj

as

SEA
I I aK
At-plan2 fired as inference

(ENTERTAINMENT...)...)}
...)...)}

obj

(PTRANS

actor

(PTRANS

actor

...)...)}

inference

completed

of #{0B.1909:

succeeds

in Cx.12

in Cx.12

person PTRANS from one location
person AT new location and
no longer AT old location

Subgoals

obj

to PERFORMANCE

action

SA
IG
IK
Goal #{0B.1938: (ACTIVE-GOAL
| I go outside.
FeO
a Ia Ik

IF
THEN

mode

(ACTIVE-GOAL

(ACTIVE-GOAL

to another

obj

(AT actor

...)

top-level-goal

...)}

completed

FA
RII K
Goal #{0B.1909: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (AT actor ...)
top-level-goal ...)} succeeds
Subgoals of #{0B.1912: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (GRAB actor ...)...)} completed
Perform

external

action

EAI
I IO IICI IK
Goal #{0B.1912: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (GRAB actor
| I grab the mail.
JAI
I I I IK
Poss-plan2 fired as inference in Cx.12
SEA
II IO II
Vprox-plan3 fired as inference in Cx.12
IF
THEN

POSS and object
VPROX that object

FA

IRI

Poss-mail-inf

fired

as

| I have the UCLA Alumni
FEO
IO IIR III
Vprox-plan3 fired as
IF
THEN

POSS and
object
VPROX that

inference

inference

object

in Cx.12

directory.
in Cx.12

...)...)}

succeeds

TRACES FROM DAYDREAMER

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

344

| Input:

Carol

| Input:

Carol’s

Burnett

went

telephone

to UCLA.
number

Adding rule

#{INDUCED-RULE.1:

Serendipity!!

(daydreaming

is in the UCLA

(RULE subgoal

Alumni

(COLLEGE

directory.

actor

...)...)}

goal)

[0B.2035:

(AG. (MTRANS actor Me from Me to Movie-star1l
obj (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (LOVERS actor Me Movie-star1)))) EPISODE.4]
(0B.2124: (AG. (VPROX actor Movie-stari Me)) EPISODE.5]
[0B.2128: (AG. (M-PHONE actor Me to Movie-star1i)) EPISODE.6]
[0B.2132: (AG. (KNOW actor Me
obj (TELNO actor Movie-stari))) EPISODE.7]
[0B.2114: (AG. (MTRANS actor Me
from (ALUMNI-DIR
to Me

obj

obj

Movie-stari)))

(TELNO actor

([0B.2140:

obj

(TELNO

[0B.2146:

(AG.

(AG.

actor

EPISODE.8]

actor

(ALUMNI-DIR

Movie-stari)))

EPISODE.9]

(AG.
(AG.

(ALUMNI-DIR

([0B.2100:

(AG.

(BELIEVE

(0B.2094:

obj

(KNOW

(COLLEGE actor Movie-stari

([0B.2111:
[0B.2107:

obj

?Var.1731:ORGANIZATION)

(VPROX actor
(VPROX actor
obj

obj

?Var.1731:ORGANIZATION)

obj ?Var.1731:ORGANIZATION))]

Me Me))]
Me

?Var.1731:ORGANIZATION)
))]

(BELIEVE actor Me

actor Me
obj (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (KNOW actor Me
obj (TELNO actor Movie-star1))))))]
(AG.

(BELIEVE

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

actor

Me

(KNOW actor

Me

obj (TELNO actor Movie-star1)))))]
| What

do you know!

DAYDREAMER receives an Alumni directory from her college, UCLA, in the
mail. The program is then provided with world states as input: The directory
contains the telephone number of Carol Burnett, who happens also to have
gone to UCLA. A new rule is induced from this input: An Alumni directory
for a given college contains the telephone number of a person if that person
went to that college. The serendipity mechanism recognizes that this new rule
is applicable to the active goal of getting in touch with the movie star. In
particular, DAYDREAMER needs to obtain the Alumni directory of the college
the movie star attended. However, since DAYDREAMER is still in performance
mode, it must first complete the processing of its ENTERTAINMENT goal:
Subgoals of #{0B.1924: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (POSS actor ...)...)} completed
FESO
IAG II AK
;
Goal #{0B.1924: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (POSS actor ...)...)} succeeds
Fact plan #{0B.2021: (KNOW actor Alumni-dir1 obj ...)} found
FEISS
III IIR
Goal #{0B.1921: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (KNOW actor ...)...)} succeeds
FOSS SIOIOI IIA IK
Mtrans-plani

for #{0B.2471:

fired

in Cx.17

sprouting

IF

for

goal

as plan

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(MTRANS

actor

...)...)}

Cx.18

person2

to MTRANS

info

from

object

to person1

A.8.

RECOVERY3 DAYDREAM

THEN

subgoals for object to KNOW info and
for personi to be VPROX person2 and
for person2 to be VPROX object and
for person2 to BELIEVE that personi has ACTIVE-GOAL
to KNOW info and
for person2 to have ACTIVE-GOAL for personi to KNOW
info

345

FEO IC

Goal #{0B.2492:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

Perform

action

external

obj

(VPROX actor

...)...)}

succeeds

obj

(MTRANS

...)...)}

succeeds

FAI
I II AGK

Goal #{0B.2650:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

actor

| I read her telephone number in the UCLA
FEI CICK
Know-plan fired as inference in Cx.23

Alumni

IF
THEN

to person

someone MTRANS info
person KNOW info

from

FEI
IC IIE
Enable-future-vprox-plani
IF
THEN

fired

as

personi
personi

KNOW
and

person2

ENABLE-FUTURE-VPROX

FC

TELNO

some

object

inference

directory.

in Cx.23

of person2

CAR

Entertainment-inf2

Subgoals

fired

of #{0B.1835:

as

inference

(ACTIVE-GOAL

in Cx.23

obj

(ENTERTAINMENT...)...)}

FEC IK
Goal #{0B.1835: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (ENTERTAINMENT...)...)}
| I succeed at being entertained.
Terminating

planning

#{0B.1835:

(SUCCEEDED-GOAL

for

top-level

obj

completed

succeeds

goal

(ENTERTAINMENT...)...)}

Removing motivating emotions.
Emotional responses.

| I feel amused.
Store episode #{0B.1835:
No more

State

goals

to run;

changes

(SUCCEEDED-GOAL

obj

switching

to daydreaming

from PERFORMANCE

to DAYDREAMING

(ENTERTAINMENT...)...)
mode

Now that DAYDREAMER has completed its ENTERTAINMENT
shifts to RECOVERY and getting in touch with the star:
Switching
Apply

to new top-level

existing

analogical

goal #{0B.1810:

(ACTIVE-GOAL

plan

FEO
OCI IC IACK
Mtrans-plan2

for #{0B.2150:
in Cx.14

fired

as

analogical

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj

plan

(MTRANS

actor

Cx.25

IF
goal to MTRANS mental state to person
THEN subgoal to be VPROX that person

...)...)}

obj

goal, focus

(RECOVERY...)...)}

Apply

TRACES FROM DAYDREAMER

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

346

existing

analogical

plan

FEC
I IIR III
Vprox-plan2

fired

for #{0B.2742:
in Cx.25

as

analogical

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

plan

obj (VPROX actor

...)...)}

Cx.26

IF

goal to be VPROX

THEN

subgoal

Apply

existing

person

to M-PHONE

person

analogical

plan

AG
RIC IKK
M-phone-plani

fired

for #{0B.2747:
in Cx.26

as

analogical

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj

plan

(M-PHONE

actor

...)...)}

Cx.27

IF

goal to M-PHONE

person

THEN

subgoal

TELNO

Apply

existing

to KNOW

analogical

of person
plan

FAC I CR
Know-plan

fired

for #{0B.2753:
in Cx.27
IF
THEN

as

analogical

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

plan

obj

(KNOW actor

goal for person to KNOW info
subgoal for someone to MTRANS
to that person

| I have to read Harrison
Apply existing analogical

FEC

Ford’s
plan

info

from

telephone

some

object

number

in the

Alumni

IK

Mtrans-plani

fired

for #{0B.2759:
in Cx.28

...)...)}

Cx.28

as analogical

(ACTIVE-GOAL

sprouting

obj

plan

(MTRANS

actor

...)...)}

Cx.29

IF
THEN

goal for person2 to MTRANS info from object to personi
subgoals for object to KNOW info and
for personi to be VPROX person2 and
for person2 to be VPROX object and
for person2 to BELIEVE that personi has ACTIVE-GOAL
to KNOW info and
for person2 to have ACTIVE-GOAL for personi to KNOW
info

Apply

existing

analogical

plan

FISICA
III IK
Induced-rule.1 fired as analogical plan
for #{0B.2765: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (KNOW actor
in Cx.29 sprouting Cx.30
FEO
IIOI ICICI IK
Inverse-college-plan

fired

for #{0B.2788: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.30 sprouting Cx.31
| I have

to know

where

...)...)}

as plan

obj

he went

(COLLEGE
to college.

actor

...)...)}

directory.

A.9.

REVENGE3 DAYDREAM

347

In order for DAYDREAMER to find out the star’s telephone number, she must
read his telephone number in the Alumni directory of the college he attended.

Therefore, she must first know what college he attended (if any).

Episodic

reminding

of #{EPISODE.3:

| I remember the time I knew where
| college by reading that she went

(EPISODE

rule Know-plan

Brooke Shields went to
to Princeton University

goal

...)}

in

| People magazine.

DAYDREAMER recalls an episode in which she was able to find out what
college Brooke Shields was attending. This plan is then applied by analogy:
FEO
ICR ACK
Know-plan

fired

as

analogical

for #{0B.2855: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.31 sprouting Cx.32
IF
THEN

plan

obj

(KNOW actor

goal for person to KNOW info
subgoal for someone to MTRANS
to that

| I have

info

...)...)}

from

some

object

person

to read

where

he went

Store episode #{0B.1810:

to college

(SUCCEEDED-GOAL

in People

obj

magazine.

(RECOVERY...)...)

This episode is then stored for possible future use in achieving

a LOVERS

goal with the movie star (or other movie stars).

A.9

REVENGES3

Daydream

DAYDREAMER goes to Westward Ho to buy a newspaper, learns of an opening
at the Broadway, interviews for the job and is hired. After all personal goal
concerns have completed, DAYDREAMER switches to daydreaming mode and
generates a REVENGE daydream which was pending:
Switching

to new

top-level

goal

#{0B.1749: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (REVENGE actor ...)...)}
Emotion #{0B.1768: (POS-EMOTION strength 0.14273477802205323...)}

below threshold.

Episodic reminding.
| I remember the time I got even with Harrison Ford for turning me down
| by studying to be an actor, being a star even more famous than he is,
| him calling me up, him asking me out, and me turning him down.

FAI
I IO
Revenge-plani

fired

as

analogical

for #{0B.1749: (ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.10 sprouting Cx.41
IF
THEN

obj

plan

(REVENGE

actor

...)...)}

goal to gain REVENGE against person for causing self
a failed POS-RELATIONSHIP goal
subgoal for person to have failure of same POS-RELATIONSHIP

TRACES FROM DAYDREAMER

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

348

its previous

recalls

DAYDREAMER

revenge

daydream

in response

to

A single rule from this daydream (Revenge-plan1) is applied to

LOVERS1.

the current situation. Other rules of the old daydream are not applicable to the
EMPLOYMENT situation; thus the remainder of the daydream is generated
through regular planning:
FESS

III

AIK

Employment-theme-plan fired
for #{0B.2925:
(ACTIVE-GOAL
in Cx.41 sprouting Cx.43

as plan
obj (BELIEVE

actor

...)...)}

actor

...)...)}

FOG III IK
Pos-att-employ-plani

for #{0B.2952:

fired

(ACTIVE-GOAL

as plan

obj

in Cx.43

sprouting

Cx.44

Subgoal

relaxation,

#{0B.2958:

| Say I am a powerful

(BELIEVE

(ACTIVE-GOAL

obj

(BELIEVE

actor))}

succeeds

executive.

FO III
IE IK
Goal #{0B.2958: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} succeeds
Subgoals of #{0B.2952: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} completed
FOO
IAI IK
Goal #{0B.2952: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} succeeds
Subgoals of #{0B.2925: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} completed
FEC
III IIR ACK
Goal #{0B.2925: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (BELIEVE actor ...)...)} succeeds
FESO AIK
Mtrans-plan2 fired as analogical plan
for #{0B.2930:
(ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS
in Cx.45 sprouting Cx.46

IF
THEN

actor

...)...)}

goal to MTRANS mental state to person
subgoal to be VPROX that person

FOIA
II IK
Goal #{0B.2987: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (VPROX actor ...)...)} succeeds
Subgoals of #{0B.2930: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS actor ...)...)} completed
FOIA III
I II K
Goal #{0B.2930: (ACTIVE-GOAL obj (MTRANS actor ...)...)} succeeds
| Agatha offers me a job.

A.10

COMPUTER-SERENDIPITY

| Input: Computer.
Serendipity!! (personal goal)
| What do you know!
Episodic reminding of #{EPISODE.8}
| I remember the time Harold and I broke the ice by
| me being a member of the computer dating service, and by him
| being a member of the computer dating service. I knew his
| telephone number by the dating service employee
| telling me Harold’s telephone number.

A.10.

COMPUTER-SERENDIPITY

349

DAYDREAMER has an active goal to initiate a LOVERS relationship with
someone when she happens to stare at an object in the room: a computer.
The serendipity mechanism, using this physical object as one index and the
active LOVERS goal as another, retrieves an episode which contains a plan for
achieving the LOVERS goal. In general, the episode which is retrieved need not
be directly related to, or indexed under, the LOVERS goal; rather, it is sufficient
for the episode to contain a rule which is applicable to any potential subgoal of
the LOVERS goal. An intersection search in the space of rule connections is
employed in order to recognize such a relationship, and unification is employed to
verify applicability of a path to the current concrete goal. The episode produced
by the serendipity mechanism is then applied through analogical planning:
Apply

existing

analogical

plan

FARSI
IO ISIC IK Kk
Lovers-plan

fired

as

analogical

plan

for #{0B.2038}
in Cx.25

IF
THEN

Apply

sprouting

Cx.26

goal for LOVERS with a person
subgoals for ACQUAINTED with person and
ROMANTIC-INTEREST in person and
person have ACTIVE-GOAL of LOVERS with self
self and
person M-DATE self and
person M-AGREE to LOVERS
existing

analogical

and

plan

FEO
IO IRI IAC
Acquainted-plan

fired

as

analogical

plan

for #{0B.2339}
in Cx.26

sprouting

Cx.27

IF
THEN

goal to be ACQUAINTED with
subgoal for M-CONVERSATION

Apply

existing

analogical

FAI
OO IOI IAC
M-conversation-plan

fired

person
with person

plan

as

analogical

plan

for #{0B.2367}
in Cx.27

sprouting

Cx.28

IF

goal for M-CONVERSATION between person1 and
person2
THEN subgoals for MTRANS-ACCEPTABLE between person1
and
person2 and
personi to MTRANS to person2 something and
person2 to MTRANS to personi something
Apply

existing

analogical

FAO
IIIT
Induced-rule.2 fired

for #{0B.2371}

plan

as analogical

plan

350

APPENDIX A. ANNOTATED

in Cx.28 sprouting Cx.29
| I have to be a member of the dating service.
| He has to be a member of the dating service.
FEI
IOI IO IK
Induced-rule.1 fired as analogical plan

for #{0B.2382}
in Cx.29
| I have

sprouting Cx.30
to pay the dating

service

employee.

TRACES FROM DAYDREAMER

Appendix

B

English Generation for
Daydreaming
This appendix describes the English generator employed in DAYDREAMER
detail.

B.1

The

in

Generator

Whenever a concept is asserted into a context, and in certain other situations,
it is eligible for conversion into English by the generator. The generator takes

the following arguments:

(a) con:

current belief path, (c) switches:

the concept to be generated, (b) bp: the

various specifications such as the tense, case,

and so on, of the phrase to be generated, and (d) context: the context in which
to generate the concept.

B.1.1

The Form of Generational Knowledge

Associated with each type of concept are generational templates which specify
how to produce an English phrase for that concept in different situations. Generational templates consist of: (a) an optional subject concept, (b) an optional

verb, (c) literal text, and (d) other concepts. Subjects are generated according
to a special procedure for subject generation which in turn recursively invokes
the generator. Verbs are generated by a procedure which contains fairly extensive morphological knowledge. Literal text is produced as English output
exactly as it appears in the template. Other concepts are generated through
recursive invocation of the generator. Modifications to the switches may be
specified following a concept: this enables specification of a different tense or
case.

351

APPENDIX B. ENGLISH GENERATION FOR DAYDREAMING

352

Here is a sample generational template:

actor(con) want obj(con)+INF
This template specifies to: (a) invoke the special subject generation procedure
on the actor slot of the concept, (b) generate an appropriate form of the verb
want, (c) recursively invoke the generator on the value of the obj slot of the

concept, and employ an INF (infinitive) in generating that concept. Given the
concept
(WANT

actor

John

obj (PTRANS

actor John
to Movies))

the template might produce:

John would have wanted to go to the movies.

The template for obj(con) might have been:

actor(con) go to to(con)
Notice, however, that the subject in this template was not generated.
the generator did not produce:

That is,

John would have wanted John to go to the movies.
This is because the special procedure for subject generation does not generate
a subject if it is the same as the subject of the phrase in which it is embedded.
If there is no generational template associated with the type of a concept to
be generated, the parent of this type is consulted, the parent of the parent of
this type is consulted, and so on, until a template is found.

B.1.2

Subject Generation

The method for generating a subject s’ of a phrase S’ embedded in a phrase S

is as follows: If s’ is the same as the subject s of S and +INF (infinitive) or
+GER (gerund) have been specified for s’, do not generate s’ at all. Otherwise,
if +INF or +GER have been specified, s’ is generated in the possessive or objective case, depending on whether +POSS-SUBJ (possessive subject) has been
specified. Otherwise, if +REFL (reflexive) has been specified, s’ is generated in
the reflexive case. Otherwise, s’ is generated in the nominative case.

B.2

Generational

Templates

This section presents the generational templates for conversion of concepts into
English in DAYDREAMER.

B.2._

GENERATIONAL

B.2.1

Mental

TEMPLATES

353

Transfer

Actions of type MTRANS are generated different ways, depending on the values of the various slots. A variety of phrases are employed when one person
MTRANSes to another that the former person has or does not have a goal to
be in a positive relationship (such as LOVERS and EMPLOYMENT) with the
latter person.
Such an MTRANS is generated according to the following template:

?Person1 verb ?Person2 [text
and according to the following table:

Other MTRANSes are generated as follows: If obj(con) is an INTRODUCTION, MTRANS

is generated as:

actor(con) introduce actor(con)+REFL to to(con)
Otherwise, if obj(con) is a MOVIE, MTRANS

is generated as:

actor(con) watch obj(con) [at from(con)]
Otherwise, if the actor and from of con are the same, MTRANS

is generated as:

actor(con) tell to(con) obj(con)
Otherwise, if actor(con) and to(con) are the same and from(con) is not a PERSON, MTRANS

is generated as:

actor(con) read obj(con) in from(con)
(If obj(con) is a TELNO, look up is used instead of read.)

B.2.2

Other

Actions

and States

A number of actions and states concepts are generated according to the following
template:

actors(con) verb tect [slot(con)]

354

APPENDIX B. ENGLISH GENERATION FOR DAYDREAMING

These concepts are specified by the following tables:

type
[vert
FACQUAINTED
[be |acquainted |__|
Ara Pog Woocet|ipa] watarear we Bh eMprob
ATTRACTIVE [be [ate
sd
COLLEGE || go|schoolat_____|
to
obj_
PEXECUTIVE
[be | powerful executive |__|
HURT
[be [injured
|
ENSuRED=
Be |exe ae
M-BEAT-UP
M-BREAK-UP
M-DATE

go

M-KISS
al
I
M-LOGIN
[log [into
————SSS—S«d
CS
[M-MOVIE
|| go _| see a movie
[/M-PHONE || call__|
|
[M-PUTON
|| put | on
M-STUDY
M-WORK

POSS
[have[ —SS—Cidr id
PTRANS
"Te cae
TC
[PTRANSI
[|go_|to
‘it. _|
RICH yaad self BONE Cen eee
cae
(bea ibe ee
ee
RAELLSaa ao¥'egs [peel eee
es
[STAR
| be | amovestr [|_|
UNDER-DOORWAY ||be__|underadoorway |__|
[WELL-DRESSED
|| be_| dressed tokil |_|
An M-PURCHASE

is generated as:

actors(con) buy obj(con) from from(con)
Several concepts are generated according to the following template:

head(bp) verb text1 others [text2] [slot(con)|
where others is actors(con) without head(bp) (or anyone [negative verb] or someone [positive verb] if others would be empty).

the following table:!
14+PROGR refers to progressive.

These concepts are specified by

B.2.

GENERATIONAL

TEMPLATES

355

have
go+PROGR |outwith |_|
“fade fon Tac
the ice with
An exception is that if the concept is a VPROX

Jo

|

and any element of ac-

tors(con) is not a PERSON and head(bp) is an element of actors(con), then the
VPROx

is generated as:

head(bp) be near others
where others is actors(con) without head(bp).
An ATRANS

is generated as:

actors(con) pay to(con)
if obj(con) is CASH, otherwise it is generated as:

actors(con) give obj(con) to to(con)
An EARTHQUAKE

is generated as:

obj(con) has an earthquake
An EARTHQUAKE-ONSET

is generated as:

an earthquake start in obj(con)
A KNOW is generated as follows: If actor(con) is not
generated as:

a PERSON, then it is

obj(con) be in actor(con)
otherwise, it is generated as:

actor(con) know [that] obj(con)
where that is not generated if obj(con) is a OBJECT,

LOCATION,TIME-OF-

DAY, VPROX, or TELNO.
Several states are generated using the template:

slot(con)+POSS tezt
according to the following table:

concept

| tect

PTELNO
[telephone
number |actor
MOVIES
| movies
CLOTHES |
cS.

io”J

24POSS refers to possessive.

APPENDIX B. ENGLISH GENERATION FOR DAYDREAMING

356

A daydreaming goal objective is generated according to the following template:

head(bp) verb [text] [slot(con)]
and the following table:

dd goal

|
obj+ GER
|
about something else
|
ad
0g
i
[get
evenwith
__|[reverse__|
—==—S~*dt CER
|
|
|rehearse |___———~—S~*diC
BFGER
|

RATIONALIZATION

ROVING

|REVENGE

REVERSAL
REHEARSAL

REPERCUSSIONS
—]consider —

Some personal goal objectives are generated as:

head(bp) verb text
according to the following table:

Type verb_| teat
ENTERTAINMENT ||be |entertained|
MONEY
[have [enough money_
A POSSESSIONS

is generated as:

head(bp) keep head(bp)+POSS belongings

B.2.3

Goals

A SUCCEEDED-GOAL

is generated as:

head(bp) succeed at obj(con)+GER
A FAILED-GOAL is generated differently, depending on obj(con), the objective of the goal. If the objective is an existing LOVERS relationship, the failed
goal is generated as:

head(bp) lose (actors(obj(con)) - head(bp))
Otherwise, if the objective is an existing EMPLOYMENT,
generated as:

head(bp) lose head(bp)+POSS job
Otherwise, it is generated as:

head(bp) fail at obj(con)+GER

the failed goal is

B.2.

GENERATIONAL

TEMPLATES

357

An ACTIVE-GOAL is generated as follows: If obj(con) is an EMPLOYMENT
and head(bp) is an ACTOR, then it is generated as:

head(bp) need work
Otherwise, if obj(con) is EMPLOYMENT,

it is generated as:

head(bp) verb a job [with other]
where (a) verb is want if it is a top-level goal and need if it is a subgoal, and

(b) other is actors(obj(con)) without head(bp), if any. Otherwise, if the concept
is a top-level goal, it is generated as:

head(bp) want obj(con)+INF
Otherwise, if the concept is a subgoal, it is generated as:

obj(con)+HAVETO
In each case above, would like is substituted for want if the concept is embedded
within an MTRANS. Thus, depending on whether a goal is a subgoal, a top-level
goal, or embedded within an MTRANS, respectively, it is generated as:

| have to go to the store.
| want to go to the store.
| would like to go to the store.

B.2.4

Emotions

In DAYDREAMER, the generation of an emotion depends on: (a) whether it
is a positive, negative, or surprise emotion, (b) whether it is directed toward
someone, (c) whether it resulted from an alternative past scenario, and (d) the
goals to which it is connected.
With the exception of SURPRISE emotions, which are simply generated as
What do you know!, emotions are generated according to the following template:

head(bp) feel [strength(con)] emotion [to(con)] [reason]
For example, in
| feel interested in being entertained.

the head of the belief path (Me in this case) is generated as |, the verb is
generated as feel, no strength is generated, the emotion is generated as interested,
no to is generated, and the reason is generated as in being entertained.
A strength less than .3 is generated as a bit and a strength greater than .7 is
generated as really; otherwise, no strength is generated. The emotzon and reason,
and whether to generate the to, depend on the particular emotion, as specified
in the following table. The conditions are given on the left side of the table
and the corresponding generational components on the right side. The table is
scanned starting from the top. Once a line is encountered whose conditions are
satisfied, the emotion is generated according to the specified components.

358

APPENDIX B. ENGLISH GENERATION FOR DAYDREAMING

io?
ddg concern
social esteem
social esteem

The conditions are:

(a) the to of the emotion specifying a person, if any,

toward whom the emotion is directed, (b) the altern?

of the emotion which

specifies whether the emotion resulted from an alternative past scenario, (c) the

active top-level goal (or concern), if any, associated with the emotion, and (d)
the failed or succeeded goal, if any, associated with the emotion. An additional
condition for the application of a given line in the table is the presence of an
emotion entry corresponding to the type of the emotion to be generated.
The notation “ddg concern” means that the concern of the goal is a daydreaming goal. Thus, | feel worried about losing my possessions is generated
when an emotion results from an imagined future failure of the POSSESSIONS
goal generated within a REPERCUSSIONS daydreaming goal concern (which
in turn motivates another REVERSAL goal to prevent that failure).
The notation “existing LOVERS” refers to a relationship that was already
true when the goal was first activated. Thus when Harrison Ford turns down
DAYDREAMER, | feel rejected is generated, while when DAYDREAMER is
dumped by Guy, | feel broken hearted is generated.
If the to? is marked “yes,” the to slot of the emotion is generated. If a reason
specifies a word and a goal, then a reason is generated as follows: If the goal is
a SUCCEEDED-GOAL or ACTIVE-GOAL, then the following is generated as
the reason:

word obj(goal)+GER
Otherwise, the following is generated as a reason.
word goal+GER
For example:

| feel interested in being entertained.
| feel displeased about failing at being entertained.

(However, a positive emotion corresponding
MENT goal is generated as | feel amused.)

to success of an ENTERTAIN-

B.2.

GENERATIONAL

B.2.5

Attitudes

A POS-ATTITUDE

TEMPLATES

359

is generated as:

head(bp) like obj(con)
If obj(con) is a PERSON, a NEG-ATTITUDE is generated as:
head(bp) think+NEG?=negate(NEG?)

much of obj(con)

(If the concept is negative, a positive verb is generated, otherwise a negative
verb is generated.) Otherwise, a NEG-ATTITUDE is generated as:

head(bp) dislike obj(con)
A ROMANTIC-INTEREST

is generated as:

head(bp) be interested in obj(con)
B.2.6

Beliefs

A BELIEVE is generated as follows: If obj(con) is a MENTAL-STATE
a KNOW or BELIEVE, it is generated as:

and not

obj(con)+BP=cons(actor(con),BP)
(That is, the new belief path consists of actor(con) added to the head of the old
belief path.) Otherwise, it is generated as:

actor(con) verb obj(con)+SIMPLIFY-TENSE+BP=tail(BP)
The verb is think when obj(con) is ATTRACTIVE, otherwise it is believe.

B.2.7

Objects and Locations

Concepts of the following types are generated by through use of a literal string
specified in the name slot of the concept: OBJECT, LOCATION, and CITY. If
there is no name slot, the concept is generated as some company, some city, and

so on.
MOVIE is generated as a movie; FASHIONABLE-CLOTHES
my cute outfit; TIME-OF-DAY is generated as the time.
ALUMNI-DIR

is generated as

is generated as:

the obj(obj(con)) Alumni Directory
Concepts which are variables are generated by retrieving an exemplar object
associated with the type of the variable, and then generating that object.

360

APPENDIX B. ENGLISH GENERATION FOR DAYDREAMING

B.2.8

Persons

A global variable called *REFERENCES* enables generation of pronouns. Any
concept, once generated, of type OBJECT, but not an exemplar, and not Me,
and not already contained in *REFERENCES* is added to *REFERENCES* after
first deleting any references of the same gender or same type as the concept.
Whenever a new paragraph is generated as a result of backtracking or switching
concerns, *REFERENCES* is cleared.
Persons contained in *REFERENCES* are generated as pronouns. (The concept Me, which corresponds to the daydreamer, is always generated as a pronoun.) Pronouns are generated as follows, depending on the concept and the
specified case (which defaults to the objective case if not otherwise specified by,
for example, the subject generation algorithm):
concept

| nominative | possessive |. reflexive | objective

hacegaarr ee enal|MG ae ul:
myself [me |
[she | her__| herself_| her
MALE-PERSON
himself _[him |
FEMALE-PERSON

Otherwise,

a PERSON

is generated as follows:

first-name(con) [last-name(con)] [’s]
The 's is employed if +POSS is specified. If there is no first-name(con) or
last-name(con), someone or someone's (if +POSS) is generated. An exemplar,
corresponding to a variable, is generated as this person

B.2.9

Other Concepts

A LIST whose rest(con) is a LIST is generated as:
first(con) and rest(con)
Otherwise, a LIST is generated as:

first(con) rest(con)
Lisp lists containing Me are generated as:

element1 element2 ...elementn and Me

Otherwise, lists are generated as:
element1 element2 ...elementn-1 and elementn
A NOT is generated as:

obj(con)+NEG?=negate(NEG?)

B.3.

GLOBAL

GENERATION ALTERATIONS

A HYPOTHESIZE

361

is generated as:

head(bp) imagine state(con)+GER
A LEADTO

is generated as:

ante(con)+POSS-SUBJ+GER lead to conseq(con)+GER
An ACTIVE-P-GOAL

is generated as:

Our relationship be in trouble
A PRESERVATION

is generated as:

head(bp) continue obj(con)+INF

B.3

Global

Generation

Alterations

Various global modifications to a sentence are performed by a collection of
strategies:
The generator produces a particle (such as up and on) after a pronoun and
before a non-pronoun. For example:
Karen took him on.
but

Karen took on Thomas.

The generator capitalizes the first word of the sentence. Normally, sentences
are ended with a period. If a concept is a SURPRISE emotion, the sentence is
ended with an exclamation point.
A new paragraph is begun (in English-only output traces) whenever backtracking or a shift to a new concern occurs.
Concepts asserted into a context marked as an alternative past context are
generated by default in the CONDITIONAL-PRESENT-PERFECT tense. For
example:
| would have told him | would like to know the time.

If the strength of a concept is less than .3 (and it is not a SURPRISE, NEGSURPRISE, or OVERALL-EMOTION), it is generated as:
possibly con
If a concept resulted from subgoal relaxation, it is generated as:

maybe con
in performance mode, and

APPENDIX B. ENGLISH GENERATION FOR DAYDREAMING

362

say con
in daydreaming mode. Concepts resulting from subgoal relaxation are generated
in the PAST-SUBJ tense if asserted into a context marked as an alternative past
context. For example:
Say he thought | was cute.
When initial hypothetical concepts are asserted, they are generated as:

what if con+PAST-SUBJ+QUEST
For example:

What if | were going out with him?
What if there were an earthquake in Los Angeles?

B.4

Generation Pruning

Much of the work in producing natural-sounding English narration of daydreaming is deciding when concepts should not be generated. Rules have optional infno-gen and plan-no-gen slots. These slots enable the programmer to add pruning
heuristics directly to inference and planning rules. (Hand-coded episode definitions may also specify a plan-no-gen list to be associated with induced rules.)
Facts inferred by an inference rule are only generated if the inf-no-gen of the
rule is NIL. The value of a plan-no-gen slot is a list of flags, one for each subgoal.
The meaning of the flags is as follows:

"OUTCOME
Whenever a goal is activated, its gen-advice slot is set to the value of the associated flag for future use. The generation of activated goals and goal outcomes
is then determined according to the following strategies:
e An activated goal is only generated if its objective is not already satisfied
in the context and its associated gen-advice flag is either NIL or ’ACTIVATE.

e A goal outcome is only generated if it is not a daydreaming goal and its
gen-advice is either NIL or ’ OUTCOME.

e A goal success is not generated if the objective of the goal had already
been satisfied in the context when the goal was activated.

B.5.

ADDITIONAL

GENERATION

363

e An activated top-level goal is only generated if it is not a daydreaming
goal.

However, input states (such as Harrison Ford is at the Nuart) are always generated.

B.5

Additional

Generation

Concepts are generated in various situations other than when a concept is asserted into a context. These section describes these situations.
When a negated fact is bolstered in the minimization strategy for rationalization, the negated fact and its justification are generated as:

anyway con+PAST because causes
where causes is determined by finding the source leaves of the inference chain.
For example:
Anyway, | was well dressed because | was wearing a necklace.

When an attitude is inverted in the minimization strategy for rationalization,
the new attitude is generated as:

anyway con
Anyway, | don’t think much of him.
After minimization has altered the strengths of emotions, these emotions are
generated.
Whenever retrieval of an episode (reminding) occurs, it is generated as:

[I remember the time] goal+PAST by subgoall +GER subgoal2+GER
...and by subgoaln+GER
where goal is the goal of the episode, and subgoali through subgoaln are the
subgoals of that goal. Each subgoal is then recursively generated according to
the same formula, until leaves are reached. The phrase | remember the time is
only generated for the top goal of the episode. Subgoals are not generated if
indicated by the associated rule.

i ape

can

:

7

iy

ee

WBS

2m
ab

noleysas!

ove mpeartond

avapeere

hoios eatin

2 aaahy wads rte matte ke
a °° dled

—
fred
savas

i bet

Adres, pare
cat ip “ne it
TAS
i?
a vies cpsibere pcaaiacet ms noalino 9a r = ne
a
_

—

ae _—

a:

7

;

' Mal

iP

ai

Cot

-

Pgs

4
*

- PS

We

ninals aoe
7

as.be srtng iw cole Alanya

}

with han

a

ans

ie

. q

ratitta-Seumiad TEA
+4a09 yews
coward suthaaake vet eget.
9 ake
;
a

Fett by avrnal aorui08 il) warts! wa‘tba
Te Sa

,

- ou

ee

sp q
io

=

i

ie

4na
fib & a iyi un iJess

7

sa 6 era
pk OF osdeezain ie
sow | coe
ni
7

Mts
se

se

ats

een ed neat
&

snare
ie

Mer

jee

jie

ale

TT

i

hie he

—_—-

Sipe:

hy

+

i¢

a

a

be hy

te

Aor

cis 4

Ty
me
i

ha

gilesad

? mi

—

Meie

aia

ene

ugwe

ie Ceara vio
rks: S

oe |

:

ibe Maton:

‘
ae

— afas AT

welt

i

ee

Samay a de

(Pay

14 ta

Ms—S

.

ori

ee

ys

:as

iyBaw

at

fj tapas

eS seen

im

set abe
a

itd) i

midas ‘thoe: dais ty 0)

3

Palme

tard, inte

be
~ gl ah turewwm add fyorrette

> Had

eet
eee
Thy

vhs 16
7? i
lavckont

(ate wank oo 7m7) —

——
pnpep wigit’ /a

ae

ares

Unkle iis BAST i- tay)M4 Ce 4)Vis tyte] jonir sia oe
wp rath
ihAK) Sale
ohne
iG
EES

—
uit

7

4

:

pecans

de

ava

wale

AT

FROM

Montara

SOY MU

NL}

ye

ti Vapour

Gi

\

bone

iy

i

Manat

Wt

:

“eek

;

ua.

ovate) bedeetin ofl

ein

: i ij

haliigcuny of a,

“al

ere ed wile

=

Wri

vnlea shies, echindiee
ine T"o

eu

4"?

Wy

egetanalted olin cteaiie art weak faa
lihaaeyete 5eiaaaaal
“4

‘

i

ew “oe orts- 3o lacus

manare, sdrevin samy cnet

oe we ale Pap
Me SoD

;

crus

(fi

t @hen Hu

jivetee

;

Bie [pani he

ont AE fa on.

oe
one

“vilyoctav. al aie lean
‘

M} vin

leads,

,
ae

Author/Subject Index
a-lists, 169
Abelson, Robert P., 32, 33, 34, 35, 50, 67,

i BOO MSZ. Gow 1 ole 5
206, 245, 276, 283, 297

Adams, Norman I., 169, 296
adaptiveness, 62, 69, 79, 82, 217, 271

2Naliis

add-name (operation), 170
add-slot-values (operation), 170
adding rule conditions, 116
Adler, Alfred, 227
age differences, 20
age of imagination, 219
aggression reduction, 68
agreements, 160

Abrahams, Paul W., 169, 291
abreaction, 217

absolute meaning, 240
abstract sameness of algorithms, 260
abstract wish, 227

ABSTRIPS 139, 164
DAYDREAMER

vs., 139

Al-complete problem, 282

accessibility of knowledge, 100

aims, 31

accident, 13, 122, 132, 138

algorithms 235, 258
sameness of, 260
algorithms for daydreaming, 178
alien biologies, 234
alpha EEG, 230

accidental by-product, 81
achievement goals, 32

ACQUAINTED,

157

action mutation 48, 132, 194, 223, 263
function of, 132
strategies for, 134
traces of, 334, 335
action mutation procedure, 48, 194
action preconditions, 143
action subgoals, 176

altered state of consciousness, 19
alternative past contexts

English generation and, 361
alternative past daydreams, 8
alternative plans 98, 179
selecting from among, 98
alternative worlds, 179
AM 14, 43, 146
agenda mechanism of, 43, 146
DAYDREAMER vs., 43, 147
success of, 147

actions 2, 3, 4, 31, 34, 87, 115, 146, 179,
183, 306
English generation of, 353
failure of, 183
input, 56
of others, 183
performing, 176, 179
representation of, 152
rules for, 175

amusement,

55

anagrams, 135
analogical daydream generation, 60
analogical planning 30, 46, 86, 89, 90, 97,
98, 117, 118, 133, 143, 189, 224,
264, 308, 327, 335, 347, 349
examples of, 91
multiple roles of, 282
previous work in, 117
procedures for, 46, 186
recursive, 91, 118
analogical rule application procedure, 47,
189
analogy
finding an, 118
learning by, 117

activation 198, 243, 278
decay of, 199
stable pattern of, 203, 208
active concern, 130

active goal, 179
active indices, 209

ACTIVE-P-GOAL
English generation of, 361
activities, 34
actor slot, 152, 153
actors, 280

Adams, James L., 15, 123, 133, 266, 283

365

INDEX

366

ancestor context, 173

associations

Anderson, J. A., 243, 280, 288

218, 223, 333
intentions and, 115
rule connection space and, 116
associative propositions, 226

Anderson,

John R., 8, 43, 116, 198, 199,

200, 213, 247, 275, 281, 283
anger 53, 56, 59, 60, 62, 66, 68, 73, 77, 78,
79, 155, 242, 317, 319
function of, 69
animal daydreaming, 22
animation 19, 266, 269

of running program, 169
antecedent 35
of inference rule, 174
of planning rule, 174
Antrobus, John, 19, 20, 25, 50, 68, 87, 151,
220 e222
ipe28a, 298
ANX, 227, 228, 230
anxiety, 79, 220, 227

anxious-distractible daydreaming factor,
220, 225
AP3, 172
Apollo, 169
appearance, 34
applications, 265, 266, 267, 269, 271
arbitrary choices, 275
arbitrary mutation, 132
arbitrary subgoal, 127
architects, 19
arguments, 19
Aristotle, 211, 283
Armstrong, Neii, 181
Arnheim, Rudolf, 19, 267, 283
Arnold, W. J., 290
arousal, 277
art 267
computation and, 268, 269
distribution of, 268
art object
computer program as, 268
creativity and, 268
artificial intelligence
as a creative endeavor, 254
creativity research in, 14, 144
future of, 253, 256
limits of, 254, 255
objectives of, 1, 253
artist’s apprentice, 268
artist’s proxy, 268
artists, 19, 267
Asimov, Isaac, 234, 283

assert (operation) 173
examples of, 173
assertions, 104
association chain, 226
association path, 226

116, 124, 130, 188, 195, 211,

assumptions, 17, 18, 20, 21
atomic actions, 248
atoms, 169

ATRANS 152, 241, 242
English generation of, 355
attack, 71
attention, 199

attitudes 10, 34, 67, 151, 154
congruity of, 156, 276
definition of, 154
emotions vs., 155

English generation of, 359, 363
inferring, 155
modification of, 155, 156, 315
narrative comprehension and, 155
of others, 153

representation of, 155
unconscious, 219
attraction, 60
attributes, 34

attribution 53, 66, 77
learning and, 103
attribution theory, 66, 77
autism
computer model of, 258
autistic thought, 216, 217
auto association, 244

autobiographical memories,
episodic memory,
memory

10 see also
experiences,

automatism, 59, 275
automobile, 1
autonomous robots, 265

autosymbolic phenomenon, 230
awakening, 20, 224
axons, 244

backtracking, 179, 180, 181, 314
backward chaining, 181
backward connections, 128
backward other planning, 154, 156, 191,
313, 325
BACON 14, 148
DAYDREAMER vs., 149
Bain, Alexander, 212
balanced proposition, 80
balanced states, 155
Ballard, D. H., 243, 244, 280, 286
bandwidth, 221
Barber, Gerald, 172, 283
Bartlett, Frederic C., 24, 133, 283

INDEX

367

basic procedures, 178
bat experience, 236
Baylor, George W., 224, 283

Cairo, 162, 327, 328

Beare, J. I., 211, 283

California, 250
Cannon, W. B., 49, 284
capitalization, 361

Beck, Aaron T., 50, 60, 62, 70, 269, 283,

car, 1

291

Carbonell, Jaime G., 6, 43, 85, 117, 118,

beeper, 26
Beethoven, Ludwig van, 12

Begin, Menachim,
behavior

196

determinism and, 235
emotions and, 78
modification of, 6
subjective experiences and, 238

Belgium, 196
belief path, 190, 351
belief system, 67
beliefs 34, 81, 153, 155
English generation of, 359
implementation of, 190
Ben-Aaron, M., 227, 283
Bexton, W. H., 16, 283

bindings, 170
biofeedback, 62

155, 284, 290, 291, 297
cassette theory of dreams, 216
cat, 213
catharsis, 68, 221
causal attributions, 53
causal chains, 97
causal dimensions, 77

causal inferences, 143
causal links, 152
causally relevant features, 89
censorship, 214
change action type mutation strategy, 134
changing environment, 99
channel capacity, 199, 221
character strings, 169
charge, 81

Charniak, Eugene, 35, 110, 128, 170, 172,
195, 247, 278, 284

biological needs, 10
biological well-being, 62
biology, 255

Chateaubriand, Francois René de, 74
cheating, 102

bisociation, 124
Bleuler, Eugen, 216, 217, 283

childhood 20, 74, 217, 219
play in, 216, 221

Bloch, George, 255, 284
Bloom, B. S., 25
Bobcat, 169

choreographers, 267

Boggess, Lois, 19, 300

bolstering, 82
BORIS 36, 78
DAYDREAMER vs., 78
bottom rule, 128, 132, 134
bottom-up approach, 253
bottoming out
of source tree, 90, 93
of target tree, 90
Bower, Gordon H., 60, 61, 77, 78, 200, 284
Bradshaw, Gary L., 14, 148, 149, 290
brain, 74, 233, 244, 252, 280
brain waves, 230
brainstorming, 12, 124, 266
Brentwood, 250
Breuer, Joseph, 68, 274, 284
British associationists, 212
Broder, L. J., 25

Brown, John Seely, 147, 291
Buchanan, Bruce G., 52, 110, 163, 298

bugs 249, 272, 273
in a plan, 117
Bundy, Alan, 98, 116, 284

child context, 173

Chomsky, Noam, 31, 274, 275, 284
chunking, 118, 269
chunks, 199

Church, Alonzo, 235
Church-Turing thesis, 235
Churchland, Paul M., 234, 253, 284
circular feedback model, 62
circumscription of research topic, 282
Clark, Margaret S., 60, 78, 200, 284, 300

class
social, 34
classical daydream, 21
classification, 245
classroom, 2
clock-tick phenomenon, 236
Clocksin, William F., 181, 284
closed-system creativity, 122
closed-system learning 96

meaning of, 97
closed-world assumption, 104
cognitive appraisal, 49, 53
cognitive balance theories, 155
cognitive dissonance 17, 63, 66, 67, 80, 155
rules for, 155
cognitive interpretation rules, 77

INDEX

368

cognitive modeler’s dilemma, 275, 277
cognitive penetrability, 240, 260
cognitive science 234
scruffy approach to, 276
Cohen, Becky, 269, 284
Cohen, Harold, 269, 284
Cohen, Paul R., 60, 61, 77, 78, 200, 284
coherent plots, 224, 266, 276
Colby, Kenneth M., 17, 49, 76, 81, 82, 83,
85, 254, 255, 257, 258, 284, 285,
288
Collins, A. M., 198, 285
color associations, 75
color perception conundrum, 236
combinatorial explosion, 98, 103, 128, 132,

141, 198, 203
commission errors, 273
commitment phase, 227
Communications of the ACM, 258

completion of tasks, 114
complex actions, 143
complexity, 258, 259, 261

computational
computational
computational
computational

mechanism),

art culture, 269
artistic medium, 268
complexity, 258, 259, 261
theory 2, 20, 235

advantages of a, 249, 250, 251
computer program vs., 257

construction of a, 256
English specification of, 261
limitations of a, 237
objectives of, 247
possible faults in a, 249
requirements for, 247
scope of, 238
testing a, 249, 256, 261, 262
computer art, 269
computer music, 269
computer

concepts

elusiveness of, 34, 241, 243, 246, 275
conceptual blockbusting, 123, 266
conceptual dependency, 152, 241
concern initiation procedure, 46, 178, 186
concern

termination

procedure,

45, 178,

181
concern-activation-driven

serendipity,

126, 193
concerns 36, 129, 136, 224, 263
activation of, 39, 46, 72, 177, 184,

186, 304, 342
current, 64
emotions and, 39
failure of, 317

halted, 97, 107, 183, 304
intentions and, 114
interleaving of, 36, 115
interruption of, 114

nonrunable, 115
partial completion of, 97

composers, 19, 267
composition
connectionism and, 208
of rules, 116
of substates, 281

composition
(dream-work
215, 278

concept formation, 118

program

as art object, 268
computational theory vs., 257
growth of a, 102
survival of a, 102
tasks of a, 102
computer programs
dreams and, 226
emotions and, 17
concept definition, 96

runable, 183
selection from among, 37, 72
shifting among, 36, 38, 345
termination of, 39, 45, 179, 181, 321
type of, 112
waiting, 183, 306

waking up of, 306
conclusions, 263, 282
concurrent verbalization, 25
condensation, 215, 226

conducting experiments, 249
conflict, 37
conflicting rules, 278
congruity principle, 155
connection information distribution, 208
Connection Machine, 272
connectionism 203, 213, 243, 253, 280
architecture for, 200, 243
concept composition and, 208
daydreaming and, 246
distributed representation for, 208,
244
for episode retrieval, 203, 204
generalization and, 206

hidden nodes for, 244
history of, 244
holistic approach to, 243
input and output for, 204, 244
input-output paradox of, 205
inspiration for, 244
instantiation in, 246
learning in, 243
local representation for, 204, 244

INDEX

369

overdetermination and, 280
problems with, 205, 206, 208, 245,

246, 253, 280
semantics in, 243
spreading activation vs., 200, 208

tasks performed by, 244
weight tuning in, 203
consciousness 236, 240
attribution of, 242
short-term memory and, 199, 281

spreading activation models and, 199
consensual judgment, 122
consequences of a theory, 261
consequent 35
of inference rule, 174
of planning rule, 174
conservation law, 269
consolation, 63
constraints, 12

content-based memory retrieval, 203
contexts

35, 87, 90, 104,

154,

169, 174,

179, 361
ancestor, 173

child, 173
current, 179
definition of, 172
descendant, 173

examples of, 173
imaginary, 185
inheritance and, 173
parent, 173

problems with, 181
purpose of, 181
reality, 180, 182, 185, 193, 303, 305,
306, 307, 317
tree of, 179
unexplored, 106
continuous daydreaming, 16, 272
contracts, 242
contradictory wishes, 217

create (operation), 170, 173
creative writing 144, 266
daydreaming and, 123
creativity 14, 266, 282
art objects and, 268
breaking away and, 123
computer models of, 144
conversation and, 267
definition of, 15, 122
demystification of, 253
dynamic memory and, 12
emotion and, 39
external influences of, 16
fanciful possibilities and, 121, 123

finding new connections and, 124
human superiority over computers
at, 255
metrics for, 122
new experiences and, 12
novel solutions and, 122
revision and, 12
serendipity and, 121, 125, 132, 138
stages of process of, 134
the unconscious and, 135
variations on a theme and, 124, 269
creativity aid, 266
critical mass, 272
critics, 139, 181, 278
critique
of connectionism, 205, 245
of discrimination nets, 196

of spreading activation, 202
of strong equivalence, 259
Crook, John H., 242, 285
Croucher, Monica, 76, 298
cultural consequences, 164
cultural constraints, 162
cultural differences, 220
Cundiff, G., 220, 285

control, 100, 181, 239

current concerns, 36, 222, 224
current planning context, 179, 191, 239

control algorithm, 38

cycles in rule connection path, 128

control faults, 98
controllability, 77
conundrum of color perception, 236
conversation 19, 87, 98, 158, 267, 310, 312,

317
overdetermination in, 274, 278

Cope, David H., 269, 285
Copland, Aaron, 267, 285

copy (operation), 170
copyrights, 268
cost metric, 110

counting out loud, 221
counting sheep, 277

cyclic data structures, 171, 172

cyclic goals, 33
CYRUS, 197
Dallin, Leon, 12, 285
Darwin, Charles, 60, 71, 285
dates, 159, 160
day remnants, 218
day residues, 218
daydream
COMPUTER-SERENDIPITY,
cussion of, 97, 101, 131
COMPUTER-SERENDIPITY,
glish trace of, 14

disEn-

INDEX

370

COMPUTER-SERENDIPITY, long
trace of, 348
LAMPSHADE-SERENDIPITY,
discussion of, 14, 97, 131

LAMPSHADE-SERENDIPITY,
English trace of, 14
LOVERS1, discussion of, 4, 5, 9, 10,

English trace of, 3
long trace of, 303
discussion of, 11,

English trace of, 4

REVENGE1,
REVENGE2,
95, 325

long trace of, 321
discussion of, 88, 94,

104,

REVENGE2,
REVENGES,

English trace of, 91
discussion of, 88, 91,

107,

REVENGES,
REVENGES,

English trace of, 11
long trace of, 347

REVENGE4,

English trace of, 70

REVERSALI,

discussion of, 11, 17,

106, 132
LOVERS2, English trace of, 9
LOVERS3,

discussion

of, 94,

95, 111, 112, 325

132
LOVERSS, English trace of, 93
NEWSPAPER,

discussion of, 107

NEWSPAPER,

English trace of, 7

RATIONALIZATIONI,

discussion

One tO Mell ligt S. 05,104,603.
99, 138, 154, 161, 162, 266
RATIONALIZATION1, English trace
of, 4

RATIONALIZATION1,
of, 325

long

RATIONALIZATION2,
of, 63, 65

discussion

RATIONALIZATION2,
of, 9
RATIONALIZATION2,

trace

66, 104, 105, 106
REVERSALI,
REVERSAL2,

English trace of, 9
discussion of, 104,

106
REVERSAL2,

English trace of, 104

REVERSAL3,

discussion

of,

104,

106
REVERSALS3, English trace of, 104
ROVINGI, discussion of, 17, 70, 209
ROVINGI,
ROVINGI,

English trace of, 5
long trace of, 332

DAYDREAMER
English trace
long

trace

of, 329
RATIONALIZATIONS,
of, 67

RATIONALIZATIONS,

112, 162, 163, 266, 273

REVENGE1,

18, 56, 66, 91, 99, 103, 104, 132,
154, 164, 183, 273, 333, 348
LOVERS1,
LOVERS1,
LOVERS2,

REPERCUSSIONS1, discussion of,
108
REPERCUSSIONS1, English trace
of, 8
REVENGE1, discussion of, 11, 17,
68, 69, 87, 88, 91, 94, 95, 111,

discussion

English trace

of, 5

RATIONALIZATION3,
of, 330

long

trace

RECOVERY1, discussion of, 93, 97,

100
RECOVERY1,

English trace of, 6

RECOVERY2,

discussion

of,

132,

134
RECOVERY2, English trace of, 12
RECOVERY2, long trace of, 333

RECOVERYS3, discussion of, 12, 97,
125, 126, 127, 128, 129
RECOVERYS3, English trace of, 13
RECOVERYS3, long trace of, 342
REHEARSAL1, discussion of, 107
REHEARSAL, English trace of, 93

applications of, 265, 266, 267, 269,

271
as robot controller, 2, 265
assessments in, 53

assumptions of, 17, 18, 20, 21
choice of problem for, 282
conceptual dependency in, 153
consciousness of, 254
consistent representation of episodes
in, 88
daydreaming goal set of, 57

domain-independence of, 265
emotion generation in, 54

emotion representation of, 53
English

generation

of, 18, 30, 56,

304, 351
English I/O of, 3
episodic memory of, 86, 88
evaluation of, 262
extensions to, 266, 267, 272, 273, 279
general description of, 2
general form of rules in, 173

generality of mechanisms in, 282
hypotheses of, 31
implementation of, 169

INDEX

371

incubation in, 136
initial state of, 3, 99, 168, 169
initialization of, 182, 187, 303

input to, 2, 3, 86, 88, 96, 183, 265,
307, 363
learning in, 117, 264
limitations of, 2, 18, 30, 64, 74, 75,

115, 140, 148, 151, 152, 190,
247, 261, 271
lines of code of, 167
modes of, 3
motivation in, 72
novelty of daydreams of, 272
number of emotions in, 73

origin of episodes in, 88
output from, 2, 3, 36

parser of, 30
pathological version of, 83, 270
person modeled by, 3, 20
personal goal set of, 32
primary control algorithm of, 38
Prolog implementation of, 181
rules of, 35, 64, 65, 68, 69, 70, 103,
105, 107, 108, 153, 156, 157,
158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163,
WAS 75; 1765 177.
search heuristics in, 133
semantic memory of, 86
size of, 168
speed of, 272

computational theory of, 2, 20, 247,
256
connectionism and, 246
conversation and, 218, 267
creative writing and, 123, 145, 266
creativity and, 15, 121, 123
cultural differences in, 220
decision-making and, 6, 109
definition of, 1, 18, 20, 22, 222, 237,

258
development and, 20, 60, 219
direction of, 9
distraction and, 20

dreaming vs., 224
emotions and, 17, 18, 50, 221
entertainment function of, 165, 221
evaluation of, 143

exploiting free time by, 57, 85
factors for, 220, 225
forgetting of, 24, 86, 135
free association vs., 25
frequent components of, 21

Freudian theory of, 214
functions of, 6, 85, 99, 221

generation of, 9
generativeness of, 31, 213

guided, 59
hypnagogic dreams and, 230
hypothetical future, 108, 146, 223,
330

statistics on, 167, 168

imagery and, 19, 22, 200, 224

summary of, 263
thoughts of, 36

importance of, 277
individual differences in, 220
induction principle for, 222
intentions and, 6, 11, 87, 113

traces from, 303

Turing-like testing of, 258
variant versions of, 270

DAYDREAMER*,
daydreaming

279

alternative past, 53, 103, 329
animals and, 22
application of experiences in, 327
artistic, 267

as I/O-less activity, 23, 258
as questions and answers, 218, 223
associationist theories of, 211, 213
associations and, 188, 195, 218, 223,

333
autistic thought and, 216
awakening from, 20, 224
basic procedures for, 178
behavior and, 93
catharsis theories of, 221
choice of the word, 23
common topics of, 15, 151

learning through, 6, 9, 11, 58
lucid dreaming vs., 231
memory and, 8, 219
momentum effect in, 39, 65
motivation for study of, 1, 2
NREM mentation and, 225
operating systems and, 265
overdetermination and, 273
parallel, 279
paranoia and, 270
past work in, 211
perpetual nature of, 16
phenomenological nature of, 19, 235

physical objects and, 130
planning and, 7, 8, 144, 145, 212,
220 2222222 (aes,
play and, 216, 221
previous theories of, 222
problem solving and, 137, 144

INDEX

372

protocols of, 2, 19, 21, 23, 37, 57,
200, 217, 222, 223, 256
questionnaires on, 219
rationalization and, 63

reading and, 218
realism of, 11, 52
recall of, 86, 224
recalling past experiences in, 223
rehearsal and, 8, 221
remembering and, 221
segmentation of, 21, 25, 36, 222
serendipity in, 13
slowing down, 25
stimulus-independent thought and,
20
supposed randomness of, 9
task-irrelevant thought and, 20
termination of, 219
the English words for, 224
time perception and, 236
transformations in, 223
triggering of, 9, 57
verbal, 18
walking and, 218
withdrawal and, 216
within dreams, 225
daydreaming goal
RATIONALIZATION, 57, 63, 79,
102, 163, 164, 177, 184, 264,
270, 311, 3195325, 329,330
RECOVERY, 57, 107, 108, 163, 264,
273, 311, 320, 333, 342
REHEARSAL, 57, 70, 107, 111, 130,
163, 264, 271
REPERCUSSIONS, 57, 108, 163,
264
REVENGE, 57, 66, 67, 78, 87, 88,
111,112, 163, °181, 264, 270,
273, 320, 321, 347
REVERSAL, 57, 60, 70, 79, 97, 108,
158, 163, 184, 264, 271, 311,
317, 320
ROVING, 57, 70, 79, 82, 163, 264,
270, 311, 320, 332
daydreaming goal concerns 59, 178, 185
side effects of, 185
daydreaming goals 56, 57, 86, 103, 138,
264
achievement of, 57
activation by emotions of, 57
activation of, 59, 311
awareness of, 59
defense mechanisms vs., 79
emotional, 58
English generation of, 356

for learning, 103
functions of, 57
hard-wired set of, 60
innateness of, 59
learning, 58
motivation of, 57

strategies for, 57
daydreaming mode, 3, 98, 303, 362
daydreams

analogical application of, 348
application to new daydreams of, 91
application to real experience of, 93
avoiding trivial variations on, 94
continuations of, 100
definition of, 21, 36
dreams vs., 224
evaluation of, 11, 109, 111

evaluation upon retrieval of, 111
future application of, 11
initial states for, 100
isomorphism of, 95
multiple factors leading to, 273
ordering of, 112
overdetermination in, 274

plots of, 224, 266
recurrent, 94
represented as trees, 222

secondary revision and, 215
selection of, 109, 112
triggered by recalled experiences,
218
triggering of, 218
wish-fulfillment, 70, 162, 216
de Bono, Edward, 12, 123, 266, 285
De Quincey, Thomas, 74
Dean, John, 87
deanimation, 228
decay 39, 61, 78

of activation, 199
of emotions, 178
of needs, 178
decision-making, 6, 82, 86, 109
deep structure, 275
defense mechanisms 78, 79, 81, 83, 227,

276
anxiety and, 79
classification of, 82
computer model of, 81

daydreaming goals vs., 79
emotions and, 79
deferred processing, 227
deflection, 81
degenerate thought, 21
DeJong II, Gerald F., 6, 85, 206, 285
delete slot, 174, 184

INDEX

373

deletion consequents, 184
delusions, 216
Dement, William C., 216, 225, 285

DeMillo, Richard A., 249, 285
demons, 248
dendrites, 244
denial, 79, 80, 82
Dennett, Daniel C., 19, 74, 75, 216, 234,

235, 236, 243, 258, 285, 289
denotational semantics, 241

denying aversive feelings, 82
dependencies, 152, 178, 186, 192
depression, 60, 61, 73, 216, 228, 269, 270

depth-first search, 179
derivative works, 269
Derksen, J., 172, 296
Descartes, René, 234

descendant context, 173
descending stage 1 sleep, 230
desirability metric 96, 109, 111, 112, 122,
165, 180, 187, 264, 318
calculation of, 109
desires, 31
Deslauriers, Daniel, 224, 283

Desoille, Robert, 59, 285
details
filling in, 99
determinism, 235
development, 20, 219
diagram forms, 75
dictaphone, 26
Dietterich, Thomas G., 116, 285
difference function, 117
Diggory, J., 60, 291
digraph theory, 226
directed thought 20, 21, 222
overdetermination and, 277
direction of attention, 37
direction slot, 152

DIRECTOR, 171
disappointment, 54
discovery, 15
discrimination nets 195, 278
for episode retrieval, 195
spreading activation vs., 203
disgust, 79, 80
displacement, 79, 226
displeasure, 51, 54, 66
dissatisfaction, 54
distortive transformation, 277
distributed systems, 179
divergent thinking, 123
diversion, 70
diversion of emotions, 329, 330

Dixon, N. F., 275, 285

DMA, 229, 230
DNA, 99
Domain, 169
Donaldson, W., 300

double meanings, 274
Doyle, Jon, 255, 286
dream processes, 225

dream thought, 222
dream-content, 214, 225, 226

dream-displacement, 215
dream-thoughts, 214, 225, 226
dream-work, 215, 277

dreaming 12
commitment phase of, 227
computer model of, 227
involvement phase of, 227
dreams 214, 222, 224, 274
cassette theory of, 216

computer analogy for, 226
daydreaming within, 225
daydreams vs., 216, 224
deanimation in, 228
emotions and, 215

forgetting of, 24
Freudian theory of, 214
hypnagogic, 21, 26, 74, 218, 230
hypnopompic, 74, 230
imagery in, 224

instigation of, 214
interpretation of, 25, 214, 225
latent, 214
lucid, 225, 231
manifest, 214

NREM, 225
overdetermination in, 274

planning and, 226
plots of, 224
recall of, 224
retrospective reports of, 23

spectator in, 228
termination of, 228
time and, 216
wish-fulfillment and, 214, 216, 277
drives, 32
driving, 1
dropping rule conditions, 116
drowsy state, 230
drug-induced states, 21
dualist theories of mind, 234, 237
duck, 251
Duda, R. O., 52, 110, 286
Dyer, Michael G., 6, 17, 35, 36, 49, 50, 51,

53, 65, 78, 151, 243, 248, 262,
270, 286, 293, 294
dynamic importance, 38, 39, 45, 181, 308

INDEX

374

dynamic memory,
déja vu, 74

12, 147

e (mathematical constant), 85
E-MOPs, 197, 198

strength of, 51
emotional states, 21
emotions 16, 34, 37, 263
activation of, 18, 39

earth, 181
EARTHQUAKE

alternative component of, 53
alternative past and, 54

English generation of, 355
EARTHQUAKE-ONSET
English generation of, 355

and reversal, 107
attitudes vs., 155
behavior and, 78

earthquakes,

cognition and, 76
computer models of, 17, 49
concerns and, 39
creation of motivating, 46, 186
deactivation of, 39
decay of, 39, 61, 78, 178

8, 100, 108, 109, 111, 271,

362
echolocation, 236
education, 271
Edwards, Daniel J., 169, 291

EEG, 230
effective procedures, 235
efficiency 96
learning and, 98
ego instinct, 32
elaboration, 196
electroencephalogram, 230
electronic telephone switching system, 247
eliminate redundant preconditions critic,
140
elusiveness of concepts, 34, 241, 243, 246,
275
embarrassment 4, 5, 55, 56, 59, 66, 75,
157, 164, 239, 310, 317
rationalization of, 332
emergent properties, 202, 208, 243, 246,
253, 277
emotion modification, 58, 107, 217, 221,
270
emotion regulation 18, 60
comparison of strategies for, 82
function of, 18, 60
emotion slot, 174, 177
emotion theorists, 56
emotion-daydream feedback loop, 57
emotion-dependent memory recall 60, 78

spreading activation and, 200
emotion-driven control, 30, 138, 305
emotion-driven control procedure, 44, 178
emotion-driven planning 37, 38

meta-planning vs., 38
emotional arousal, 277

emotional daydreaming goals, 58, 60
emotional feedback system, 61
emotional interpretation rules, 77
emotional motivation, 38, 44, 178
emotional responses 17, 39, 45, 50, 181,

182, 185, 310, 317, 321
negation of, 51
realism and, 51
rule for, 52

directed, 53, 55, 66
diversion of, 329, 330
dreams and, 215

English generation of, 54, 56, 357
focus of attention and, 17
function of, 56, 62

generalization of, 62
goal component of, 53
goal outcomes and, 50, 77, 78

human vs. computer, 72
idiosyncratic, 74, 75
imagined past events and, 51
increase of, 17
instincts and, 79
interrupts and, 78
modification of, 17, 18, 64
motivation and, 37, 39, 71
music and, 75
narrative comprehension and, 17, 78
negative, 17, 39, 59
nonconscious, 277
overdetermination and, 277
perpetuation of, 61, 78, 216

phenomenology of, 17, 72
plan completion and, 78
positive, 39
previous work in, 49, 76, 77, 78
primary, 56, 75, 77

priorities vs., 43
processing and, 18, 73

reactivation of, 188
recovery and, 108

regulation of, 60
rehearsal and, 108
representation of, 18, 53, 56

representation using vectors of, 77
sequence of vs. single, 17
sign of, 53
strength of, 38, 39, 51, 53, 56

strengthening of, 60

INDEX

375

supposed epiphenomenality of, 73
words for, 54, 56
emotions as abstraction, 72, 73
emotions as motivation
arguments against, 71

physical objects as indices for, 131
procedures for, 46, 186

arguments for, 72
employment relationships 34
formation of, 161

representation of experiences in, 87,

reconstructive, 24

repair for application of, 90, 91, 94,

95, 98, 348
96
retrieval of experiences from, 46, 89,

termination of, 162
ends, 31

187, 193, 264, 333, 347, 348
spreading activation and, 200
storage of experiences in, 46,

engineering objectives, 247
English parser, 30
English phrasal patterns, 271
entertainment goal, 55
entertainment need, 4, 304, 342
environmental conditions, 34
environmental stimuli, 20
EPAM, 195

episodic prospective remembering, 113
episodic rules, 96, 100, 126, 189, 192
episodic-semantic memory distinction, 86,

95, 96
Ericsson, K. Anders, 2, 24, 136, 199, 200,

239, 286

epiphenomenalism, 73, 75, 238, 239
episode retrieval procedure, 46, 187
episode storage procedure, 46, 187
episode-driven serendipity, 125, 129, 193
episodes 263
application of, 11

for changing knowledge accessibility,
100
for improvement of search, 98
hand-coded, 88, 91, 93, 99, 100, 187
intentions and, 113
proliferation of, 95
representation of, 10, 87, 96
retrieval of, 11, 187

Ernst, George, 12, 137, 286
erotic fantasies, 151
errors of commission, 273
errors of omission, 273
escape, 79

ESS, 250
EURISKO,

148

evaluation, 109
evaluation metrics, 109, 133
evaluations, 80, 154

Evans, Christopher, 226, 286

Evans, David A., 267, 274, 279, 289
event recording, 26
everyday creativity, 15
evolution, 16, 99

exaggerating favorable consequences, 82
exaggerating remoteness of action com-

serendipity and, 129
storage of, 10, 46, 88, 187

utility criterion for, 88
episodic instantiation of details, 99
episodic memory 10, 86, 263
adding daydreams to, 86
application of experiences in, 89
contexts and, 181

daydream evaluation and, 111
daydreams stored in, 86
distinguishing real from imaginary
experiences in, 87
emotional congruence and,

187,

321, 325, 332, 347

English generation, 30, 54, 304, 351

60, 78,

200
evaluation metrics and, 110

for making predictions, 95
indexing of experiences in, 86, 113,
195
issues for theory of, 95
learning and, 264
modified through reversal, 103
ordering of, 112

mitment, 82

exceptions, 276
excessive negative emotions, 60
excitatory links, 243
executor, 140
exemplar objects, 359
exercise of thought, 217

EXPAND-ALTERNATIVES

reversal

strategy, 104, 106
EXPAND-LEAVES reversal strategy, 104,

106
expectations of success, 60
experiences
accessibility of, 86
alternative past, 21
application to daydream of, 91, 93
as predictors of future experiences,
100
confusion of real and imaginary, 87
emotional reappraisal of, 61

INDEX

376

hypothetical future, 21
incorporation into daydreaming, 11
personal, 10
reactivation of emotions of, 60
recall of negative, 60
recalled past, 21
reinterpretation of, 9, 50
secondhand, 10, 11, 86
explanation 72, 246, 251, 253
low-level vs. high-level, 251
explanation-based generalization, 95, 206
exploiting free processing time, 85
external actions, 4
external appearance, 34
external attribution, 66, 82
external environment 37, 241
isolation from, 224
external feedback, 106, 222
external input, 183, 307
external stimulation, 221
external stimuli, 130, 222, 224, 234
external world, 2, 20, 60, 96
face validity, 257
fact retention, 8
fact strength, 67
factor analysis, 220
facts, 172
Faletti, J., 140, 286
falling asleep, 277
falling experience, 74
fan effect, 199, 202

fanciful daydream generation, 35
fanciful planning
strategies for, 162
fanciful solutions 12, 121, 129, 138, 162
function of, 124
fanout, 128
fantasy, 20, 21 see also daydreaming
Farrell, B. A., 236, 286
Faught, W. S., 258, 288
favors, 158
fear, 71, 79
features, 203, 204, 245
feedback, 57, 60, 61, 96, 106, 222
FEELER 78
DAYDREAMER vs., 78, 79

feeling better, 17, 63
feelings, 21
Feigenbaum, Edward A., 137, 195, 278,
286
Feldman, Jerome A., 243, 244, 280, 286
Feldman, Julian, 137, 286
Feshbach, Seymour, 68, 286
Festinger, Leon, 17, 63, 66, 67, 80, 82, 83,
155, 286

Fikes, Richard E., 12, 16, 31, 43, 118, 121,
137, 139, 144, 286
file, 170
file system, 266
filling in details, 99
film 266
viewing of a, 266
find the prime mover, 81
finding bugs, 249
finding new connections, 124
finite-state automaton, 235
Fiske, Susan T., 284, 300

Flavell, J. H., 20, 59, 181, 190, 286
Fleisher, S., 52, 224, 230, 287
Fodor, Jerry A., 234, 286
folk psychology 241, 243, 253, 256
a new taxonomy for, 253
food goal, 55

fooling humans, 255
fore-conscious thought, 217
forgetting 24, 86

incubation and, 135—
of intentions, 116

pathology and, 116
selective, 135
fortuitous subgoal success 39, 45, 55, 97,

182, 183
definition of, 114

forward chaining, 181
forward connections, 128
forward other planning, 153, 154, 190, 326,

327
Foulkes, David, 21, 23, 52, 224, 225, 226,
230, 277, 287
frames, 169, 243, 268
free association, 25, 214, 221, 225, 277
French Riviera, 2

French, Thomas M., 227, 228, 287
Freud, Anna, 78, 79, 276, 287
Freud,

Sigmund,

21, 24, 25, 31, 32, 68,

79, 115, 116, 123, 135, 162, 214,
2UD P2165 207, 21956222, 225.
226, 227, 230, 266, 274, 276,
277, 278, 284, 287
Friday, Nancy, 151, 287

friends relationships 34
formation of, 157, 161
fully redundant discrimination nets, 196
functional architecture, 239, 258, 259
functionalist semantics, 241
functionalist theories of mind, 234, 254
future daydreams, 6
future plans 87, 107
detection of problems in, 107

INDEX

377

future work, 18, 74, 75, 128, 148, 151, 190,
247, 261, 262, 263, 270, 272,
273, 279
Gackenbach, Jayne I., 231, 287
Galanter, E., 114, 292
games, 271

gang fantasy stage, 219
garbage collection, 182, 272
Garfield, Patricia, 231, 287
GATE 169, 179
description of, 169
gen-advice slot, 362
gender differences, 20
general problem solving, 37

pruning of, 362
generational templates, 351
generative grammar, 274
generative processes, 274
generativeness, 31, 213
generator 30
arguments to, 351
invocation of, 351, 363
knowledge used by, 351
recursive invocation of, 351
generic rules, 100
Genesereth, Michael R., 276, 299
genetic mutation, 99

get-names (operation), 170
get-slot-values (operation), 170

generalization 118, 197, 223
connectionism and, 206

get-type (operation), 170

generalizations

Geulincx, Arnold, 234

of a theory, 247, 252

Ghiselin, Brewster, 289, 295, 298

generalize object mutation strategy, 134

Giambra, Leonard M., 220, 287

generate and test, 273
generation 304, 351
global alterations in, 361
of actions and states, 353

Gibbs, Jr., Raymond W., 274, 287, 294,
317
Gilligan, S. G., 284
Ginsberg, Matthew L., 276, 299

of ACTIVE-P-GOAL,

361

global context, 181

of alternative pasts, 361

global variables, 182

of ATRANS, 355
of attitudes, 359, 363
of beliefs, 359
of daydreaming goals, 356

goal detector, 140
goal failures
imagined future, 64
reasons for, 106

of EARTHQUAKE,

355

of EARTHQUAKE-ONSET,
of emotions, 357
of goals, 356

goal outcomes 50

355

side-effect, 64, 264
goal selection subgoal, 37
goal slot, 174, 176, 177

of HYPOTHESIZE,

361

goals 4, 10, 16, 31, 34, 87

of hypotheticals, 362
of infinitive, 352
of KNOW, 355
of LEADTO, 361
of lists, 360
of locations, 359

achievement, 32
achievement of, 31
active, 54
adaptive tuning of, 101
competition of, 143
concord of, 143

of M-PURCHASE,

conflict of, 37, 141, 142, 217, 239

354

of MTRANS, 353

cyclic, 33

of NOT, 360
of objects, 359
of personal goals, 356
of persons, 360
of physical objects, 359
of POSSESSIONS, 356
of PRESERVATION, 361
of pronouns, 360
of references, 360
of remindings, 363
of subgoal relaxation, 361
of subgoals, 357, 362, 363
of verbs, 351

deactivation of, 112, 318
English generation of, 356
episodic memory and, 88, 89
importance of, 39, 51, 217
interaction among, 10, 32, 33
multiple, 16, 138
narrative comprehension and, 32
of others, 153
ongoing, 16, 138
origin of, 10
overlap of, 143
preservation, 105, 106
primitive set of, 31

INDEX

378

subsumption of, 33, 143, 152
survival and, 101
ties among, 37
top-level, 36, 55, 59
Goffman, Erving, 155, 287
Gold, S. R., 220, 285
Goldman, Neil, 172, 195, 287
Gouaux, Charles, 60, 288
GPS 12, 137, 140
DAYDREAMER vs., 137, 138
graph isomorphism, 95
graphical animation, 19, 266
graphical interface, 169
gratitude, 55, 66
greatest potential obstacle, 317
Green, Celia E., 225, 231, 288
Green, George H., 2, 6, 20, 24, 60, 219,
288
Greenberg, Stanley, 20, 221, 283
Griffin, Donald R., 22, 288
Grossberg, S., 243, 288
group isomorphism, 254
group problem solving, 124
growth, 101
Griinbaum, Adolf, 277, 288
guided affective imagery, 62
guided daydreaming, 59
Guilford, J. P., 123, 288
guilt, 75, 220
guilty-dysphoric daydreaming factor, 220,
225
habitual behaviors, 275
habitual prospective remembering, 113
habituation, 268
HACKER, 117
hallucinations, 16, 52, 224, 225
halted concern, 107, 183, 304
hand-coded episodes, 86, 88, 91, 93, 97,

99, 100, 187, 263, 273
hand-coded

information, 30

happiness, 54
hard-wired, 60
hardware architectures, 235
Hariton, E. B., 151, 288

Heider,

Fritz, 35, 66, 67, 103, 151, 155,

156, 276, 288
Heiser, J. F., 258, 288
Helmholtz, Hermann L. F. v., 134
Hendler, James A., 155, 297
Heron, W., 16, 283

Hewitt, Carl, 125, 181, 247, 280, 288, 290
Hewlett-Packard, 169
hidden blessing, 65, 80, 82
HIDDEN BLESSING plot unit, 65
hidden nodes, 244

hierarchical planning, 139
hierarchy of types, 169
higher-level needs, 10
Hiller, Lejaren, 269, 288
Hillis, Daniel, 272, 288
Hinton, Geoffrey E., 200, 203, 204, 205,

208, 243, 244, 245, 246, 280,
281, 288, 292, 296, 297
Hobbes, Thomas, 211, 212, 289
Hobbs, Jerry R., 267, 274, 279, 289
Hofstadter, Douglas R., 63, 74, 124, 135,

234, 236, 243, 258, 280, 289
holistic connectionism, 243, 244, 280
holistic representation, 243

Hollan, J. D., 196, 300
holographic metaphor, 243
homospatial thinking, 124
hope, 51, 55, 108

Horn, Berthold K. P., 169, 235, 301
household robot, 16, 265
Housman, A. E., 267, 289

Huba, G, J., 220, 289, 297
Hume, David, 212
humiliation, 50, 56, 66, 68

hypnagogic dreams 21, 26, 74, 218, 230
daydreaming and, 230
hypnopompic dreams, 74, 230
hypotheses, 31
HYPOTHESIZE
English generation of, 361
hypothetical experiences
future, 6
past, 8

harmonic relationships, 269
Hart, P. E., 43, 52, 110, 118, 144, 286
Hart, Timothy P., 169, 291
Hartley, David, 212
hashing, 173, 258
Hastorf, A., 284
Hayes, Patrick J., 181, 291
Hayes-Roth, Barbara, 115, 132, 144, 288
Hayes-Roth, Frederick, 115, 132, 144, 288,
290

hypothetical worlds, 35, 179, 180

heartbreak, 55

illumination 15

hypotheticals
English generation of, 362
identification, 215
ideologies, 39
idioms, 274
idiosyncratic emotions 74, 75
theory of, 75, 76
idiosyncratic goals, 34

Illiac Suite for String Quartet, 269

INDEX

379

serendipity and, 136
surprise and, 136
illumination stage, 135
imagery, 19, 21, 22, 74, 200, 222, 224, 225,

230, 231
Imaginal Processes Inventory 25, 68, 220,

225
reliability of, 220
sample items of, 220
imaginary contexts, 185
imagined episodes, 86
imagined goal failure, 55, 72
imagined goal success, 55
imbalanced proposition, 80
imitation game, 257
importance
dynamic, 38, 39, 45, 181
intrinsic, 39
improvement of efficiency, 96
impulses, 31

in-depth representation, 151, 243
inaccessibility, 138
inaccessible rules, 96, 126
inapplicable rule, 90, 91
incorrect daydreams, 273
increased motivation, 55
incremental modification 12, 15, 110, 117,
121
of utterances, 279
incubation 15, 134
forgetting and, 135
nonconscious thought and, 135
repression and, 135
serendipity and, 136
theories of, 135
value of, 136

incubation stage, 135
indexing 86, 113, 131, 187, 193, 263
as relevance heuristic, 96
automatic determination of, 187
under goals, 88, 89
under planning rules, 88, 90
individual differences, 220
induction principle, 222
inf-no-gen slot, 362
infantile wishes, 214, 219
inference chain 104
leaves of, 104
inference inhibition, 164
inference rule application procedure, 46,
178, 184
inference rules 30, 35, 57, 86, 105, 153, 263
_ examples of, 175, 176, 177
for actions, 175
for concern activation, 177

general form of, 173, 174
Inference-only, 174
inferencing, 155
infinite daydream loops, 271

infinite inferencing loops, 185
infinite set of emotions, 75
infinite storage, 254
infinitive
English generation of, 352
inhibitory links, 200, 243
initial facts, 303
initial world state, 30
input

of physical objects, 97, 131
input actions, 56
input induction, 116, 344
input-output behavior, 237
input-output equivalence, 259
input-output paradox of connectionism,

205
input-state-driven

serendipity

126,

132,

193
example of, 307
insight 15, 134
serendipity and, 136
surprise and, 136
instantiation

35, 87, 116, 169, 177, 246,

305
cycles and, 172
definition of, 172
examples of, 172
of entire plan, 305
rule application and, 174
instincts 31
ego, 32
emotions and, 79
sexual, 32
instruction sets, 235
instrument slot, 152
integrated thought, 21
intelligence
Turing test for, 257
intelligent computers, 254, 255
intentions 6, 7, 8, 11, 86, 87, 113, 142
associations and, 115
confusion about, 116

forgetting of, 116
one-shot, 113, 114, 116
persistent, 113, 116

recall of, 126
interactive propositions, 226
interest emotion, 39, 54, 55, 59, 64, 304,

317
interest-excitement, 39, 55, 75
interferences, 135

INDEX

380

interior monologue, 18
interlacing of events, 276
interleaving, 43
interleaving of concerns, 36, 115
intermediate variable, 72
internal stimulation, 221
interning, 188
interpersonal domain 10, 34, 151, 265
mathematical domain vs., 148

interpersonal relationship goal, 55
interpersonal relationships 10, 34, 151, 159
formation of, 157

termination of, 161
interpolation, 208
interpreters 235, 255
nested, 235
interrogation, 223
interruption, 43
intersection indexing, 208
intersection search, 47, 127, 128, 192, 264,
333, 349
intrinsic importance, 39, 110, 263, 265,
304
introspection, 239, 255, 277
intuition, 109
involuntary memories, 74
involvement phase, 227
is slot, 174
Isaacson, L. M., 269, 288
Isen, Alice M., 60, 78, 200, 284
isolation, 82
isomorphism, 254
Israel, 196
Izard, Carroll E., 17, 39, 55, 56, 59, 60,
63," 68,69; 70; 7Lae%2.075; (6,
77, 289
Jakobson, Roman, 31, 289
James, William, 21, 22, 49, 74, 75, 136,
199, 213, 239, 244, 289
Janis, Irving, 82, 289
janusian thinking, 124
job, 329
job interview, 1, 7, 113
Johnson, Marcia K., 24, 87, 289

Johnson, Peter N., 274, 278, 289
Johnson-Laird, Philip N., 185, 235, 254,
260, 289
joint works, 269
Jones, E., 79, 289

joy, 54
Joyce, James, 145
judgments, 154
JUMBO, 135
Jung, Carl, 22, 222, 289
K-lines, 281

K-recursion principle, 281

Kahn, Kenneth M., 171, 289
Kahneman, D., 51, 289
Kedar-Cabelli, Smadar T., 95, 118, 289,
293
Kellar, Richard M., 95, 293
Kelley, H. H., 66, 289
Kernighan, Brian W., 257, 290
key-press device, 26, 223

Klahr, Philip, 127, 290
Kleitman, Nathaniel, 216, 285
Klinger, Eric, 2, 6, 8, 15, 20, 21, 22, 25, 26,
36, 71, 86, 130, 200, 222, 224,
225, 230, 266, 290

kludges, 257
KNOW
English generation of, 355
knowledge level, 239, 241, 247, 256, 281
Koestler, Arthur, 124, 290
Kolodner, Janet L., 6, 43, 85, 155,

195,

196, 197, 198, 203, 290, 297
Kornfeld, William A., 125, 290

Kowalski, R., 128, 290
Kris, Ernst, 135, 290
Kugel, Peter, 235, 290
LaBerge, Stephen, 216, 225, 231, 290

Laird, John E., 17, 37, 290
Langley, Pat, 14, 148, 149, 198, 200, 201,
278, 290
language, 240
latent conflict, 227
latent dream, 214

lateral thinking, 12, 123, 266
law of conservation, 269

Lazarus, R. S., 71, 72, 290

lazy evaluation, 255
LEADTO
English generation of, 361
leaf subgoals, 106
learning 58, 264
as search reduction, 98
attribution and, 103
by analogy, 117
definition of, 7, 96
efficiency and, 98
external feedback and, 96
from alternative past daydreams, 9
from failures, 6, 103
from imagined experiences, 6, 85
from real experiences, 6, 85
growth and, 102

ongoing vs. one-shot, 9
past work in, 116
sources of input in, 96
survival and, 99

INDEX

381

through reversal, 103
through rule modification, 116
through serendipity, 126, 138
learning daydreaming goals, 58, 103
leaves
of inference chain, 104

Leavitt, Ruth, 269, 290
Lebowitz, Michael, 85, 197, 290

Lehnert, Wendy G., 64, 65, 290, 298
Leiman, Burt, 113, 292
Lenat, Douglas B., 14, 43, 99, 146, 147,

148, 291
Leuner, Hanscarl, 59, 291
Leviathan, 211

Levin, Michael I., 169, 289, 291
Levine, Ralph L., 240, 295

Lewin, Kurt, 34, 87, 114, 115, 116, 291
Lewis, Harry R., 235, 291
Libet, Benjamin, 275, 291

limitations, 2, 18, 64, 74, 75, 115, 140, 148,
151, 152, 190, 247, 261, 271
links, 152, 198, 243, 247, 281
Linton, Marigold, 86, 291

Lipton, Richard J., 249, 285
Lisp, 146, 147, 169, 227, 229, 235, 246
Lisp list, 170
Lisp objects, 169
lists

English generation of, 360
local mappings, 223
local representations, 204
locations 34, 74
as memory indices, 187
English generation of, 359
Locke, John, 212
locus of causality, 77
Loeb, A., 60, 291
Loftus, E. F., 24, 198, 285, 291
LOGO, 271
long-term state, 104
Los Angeles, 108, 109, 110, 161, 328, 329
Losch, Mary E., 224, 295
love, 155
lovers relationships 34, 55, 159

formation of, 157, 159
inferences from, 160
termination of, 161
lucid dreams 225, 231

daydreaming vs., 231
issues for theory of, 231
lust, 80

Luthe, Wolfgang, 62, 291
M-PURCHASE
English generation of, 354
machine learning, 11

MACROPS, 118
Maeder, A., 227
MAGPIE, 278
main routines, 222
maintaining arousal, 221
maladaptiveness, 79, 82, 271
Mandler, George, 53, 71, 76, 114, 291
manifest dream, 214
Mann, Leon, 82, 289
manual tuning, 202
Manure Wagon Dream, 228, 229
Marcel, A. J., 275, 291
Marina del Rey, 209
marking algorithm, 188, 193, 208
Mars, 12
Maslow, Abraham H., 32, 101, 291
massively parallel processing, 279
materialist theories of mind, 234, 237, 254,
255
mathematics, 146, 241
Maury, L. F. A., 21, 216, 230, 291
McCarthy, John, 169, 181, 208, 291
McClelland, James L., 200, 203, 204, 205,
206, 208, 243, 245, 281, 288,
291, 292, 294, 296, 297, 299
McCraven, V., 151, 219, 220, 298
McDermott, Drew V., 35, 128, 170, 172,
195, 246, 278, 284, 292
McDougall, W., 6, 22, 31, 79, 292
McKellar, Peter, 74, 230, 292
McNeil, Janene, 2, 50, 87, 164, 221, 292
Meacham, John A., 113, 292
meaning
absolute, 240
means-ends analysis, 117, 137
meditative states, 21
Mednick, Sarnoff, 124, 292
Meehan, James, 14, 144, 169, 292, 296
Mellish, Christopher S., 181, 284
Meltzer, Bernard, 291, 295
memory 10, 21 see also episodic memory,
experiences
as a process, 221, 280

association and, 211

daydreaming and, 8, 219
elaboration and, 196
emotional congruence and, 60, 78,
200
for daydreams, 86
profound recall effects, 74
memory trace, 24
mental blocks, 126, 134
mental entities, 233
mental imagery, 19
mental states 34, 153, 155, 164, 190, 234

INDEX

382

of others, 35
merging
of concepts, 278
of event sequences, 276, 278
merging processes, 274
Messick, S., 283, 284
meta-goals, 141, 181
meta-planning, 15, 17, 37, 38, 115, 140,
181, 278
meta-themes, 37
metacognition, 20, 21, 37, 59, 73, 181, 190,
230, 277
metalanguage, 241
metaphors, 224
Metz, Christian, 266, 292
Metzler, Jacqueline, 19, 298
Meyer, Leonard B., 19, 75, 241, 292
Michalski, Ryszard S., 116, 276, 284, 285,
290, 291, 292
Michie, Donald, 291, 295
microcode, 260

Middle English, 224
Mill, James, 212
Mill, John Stuart, 212
Miller, George A., 114, 199, 281, 292
mind-body problem 72, 233
approaches to, 234
minimization, 66, 80, 82, 332, 363

creation of, 46, 186
motivation 37, 38, 39, 44, 55, 60, 178, 305
emotions and, 71
priorities vs., 43
motives, 222
mouse, 12

MTRANS 152
English generation of, 353
Mueller, Erik T., 71, 169, 171, 179, 262,
266, 293, 294
Mueller, Rachel A. G., 274, 287, 294, 317
Mueller, Robert E., 255, 269, 294
multiple goals, 76, 138
multiple slot values, 171

multiple thought streams, 279
music, 12, 74, 75, 241, 267
Muskie, Edmund,

197

mutation 48, 132, 194
traces of, 334, 335
mutation

mechanism,

30, 122,

minimizing personal responsibility, 82
minimizing social surveillance, 82
minimizing unfavorable consequences, 82

narrative comprehension,

Minsky,

natural selection, 99

Marvin,

43, 169, 247, 255, 280,

281, 292, 293, 295
Mischel, W., 60, 293
missing solutions, 138
Mitchell, Tom M., 95, 284, 290, 291, 293

125,

132,

263
mutation-driven serendipity, 126, 193
MYCIN, 36
mysterious mechanisms, 256
mythology, 222
Nagel, Thomas, 19, 74, 75, 236, 294
names for nodes, 246
Narayanan, A., 237, 294
32, 53, 78, 143,

151, 155
natural language, 56

modification of behavior, 6

Neches, Robert, 198, 200, 201, 278, 290
need hierarchy, 32
need states 33
replenishment of, 321
needs 10, 31, 32, 178, 222, 304, 320, 342
decay of, 178
origin of, 10
primitive set of, 31
negation, 223

modification of emotional state, 58

negative attitudes, 67, 155, 157, 310

molecular analogy, 135
momentum effect, 39, 65

negative consequences 7, 98, 158
detection of, 7
negative emotions 17, 39, 59, 64, 220, 227
cycle of, 61
desirability of, 61

mixed blessing, 64, 80, 82

MIXED
modes

BLESSING

plot unit, 64

switching of, 178, 183, 306, 347

Monteiro, K. P., 284
moods, 60, 221
moon, 181
Moore, Johanna D., 179, 293

MOPs, 89, 95
morning dreams, 230
morphological knowledge, 351
Moser, Ulrich, 227, 228, 229, 230, 293
Moss, J. Eliot B., 179, 293
Mostow, Jack, 96, 251, 293
motivating emotions

function of, 60
motivation function of, 62
threats and, 60

undesirability of, 61
negative side-effects, 158
NEGEM, 227, 228, 230
Neisser, Ulric, 8, 24, 76, 87, 243, 291, 294
nested interpreters, 235

INDEX

nested transactions, 179, 266
neurons, 244, 252
neuroscience, 234, 253
neurosis 81, 82
computer model of, 81
New York, 109, 110
Newell, Allen, 12, 31, 117, 121, 137, 239,
241, 286, 294
Newman, E. A., 226, 286
night dreams, see dreams, dreaming
nightmare, 231
Nii, Penny, 269, 284
Nilsson, Nils J., 12, 16, 31, 43, 52, 110,
14856 121,°1285-137, 139; 144,
179, 286, 294
Nisbett, R. E., 238, 294
NOAH 139
DAYDREAMER vs., 140
nodes 198, 243, 247, 281
names for, 246
nonconscious emotions, 277
nonconscious priming, 275
nonconscious processes, 274
nonconscious thought 20, 74, 79, 214, 217
incubation and, 135
memory and, 221
psychological evidence for, 275
nonrunable concerns, 115
nonsense syllables, 195
nonsensical thoughts, 230
Norman, Donald A., 76, 130, 243, 275,
280, 293, 294, 297
NOT

English generation of, 360
novel solutions, 122
novelists, 267
NREM dreams, 225
nuclear reactor controller, 237

object names, 169
object slot, 152, 153
object-driven serendipity, 125, 130, 188,
193
objective beliefs, 190
objectives, 31
objectives of a theory, 247
objectives of research, 5
objects 14, 97
English generation of, 359
obligation, 242
obsession, 69
occupation, 34
Olympic athletes, 8
OMEGA, 172
omission errors, 273
one-hundred step constraint, 244

383

one-shot intentions, 113, 114, 116

one-shot learning, 9
ongoing goals, 138
open-endedness of concepts, 241

opening lines, 157
operant segments, 222
operating systems, 43, 85, 179, 265
operational semantics, 246
operationality criteria, 96
operator, 12
opportunism, 13
opportunistic planning, 115, 144
optimism, 103

optimizations, 140, 173, 184, 272, 278, 305
organizations
as memory indices, 187
Ornstein, Robert E., 21, 294
Osborn, A. F., 12, 124, 266, 295
Osgood, C. E., 155, 295
other planning 35, 153, 190
backward, 154, 156
forward, 153, 154
outinventing computers, 255

output filter, 19
overall emotional state, 188
overdetermination 215, 273
connectionism and, 280

definition of, 274
directed thought and, 277
emotions and, 277
examples of, 274
generative grammar and, 275
mechanism for, 274
of manifest dream elements, 215
rule exceptions and, 276
spreading activation and, 281
voluntary thought and, 277
overdetermination mechanism 274
benefits of an, 275
construction of an, 278
problems for an, 276
paging, 272
pain, 108
pairing, 80
pairs, 169
PANDEMONIUM, 209
PANDORA 140
DAYDREAMER vs., 140, 141, 142,
143, 144
problems with, 141, 142
pangs, 53
Papadimitriou, Christos H., 235, 291
Papert, Seymour, 271, 295
paradox 75, 122, 259, 260

of mind understanding itself, 254

INDEX

384

of voluntary thought, 277
paragraphs, 361
parallel daydreaming, 279
parallel distributed processing,
nectionism

see con-

parallel processing, 203, 247, 279

parameter substitution, 91
paranoia, 17, 76, 270
parent context, 173
parental instinct, 80
Paris, 162

Parkison, R. C., 258, 288
PARRY 76, 85, 255
DAYDREAMER vs., 76
parser, 30, 183, 307
parsimony, 275
partial concern completion, 97
particles, 361
Pascal, 169

path verification, 128, 131
pathology 25, 83, 103, 214, 217, 270
forgetting and, 116
Paton, R., 68, 295
pattern association, 245

pattern matching, 170
PDP Research Group, 200, 288, 291, 292,
294, 296, 297, 299
Pearl, Judea, 110, 295

Pekala, Ronald J., 240, 295
perception, 275

perception of time, 236
performance

mode

3, 86, 88, 93, 96, 98,

100 LOG 2
SS ashe 8s,
256, 270, 273, 306, 311, 314,
344, 361
reasonable responses in, 102
serendipity and, 125

testing of learning through, 102
performing an action, 176, 179
Perlis, Alan J., 249, 285
permute objects mutation strategy, 134
perpetual motion machine, 16
perpetuation of emotions, 61, 78, 216
persistent intentions, 113, 116
personal attributes, 34
personal experiences, 195

personal goal
COMPANIONSHIP, 33
EMPLOYMENT, 33, 102, 111, 177
ENTERTAINMENT, 33, 102, 131,
304, 305, 342
FOOD, 33, 111
FRIENDS, 33, 102, 161
LOVE-GIVING, 33
LOVE-RECEIVING, 33

LOVERS, 32, 102, 103, 104, 111,
130, 131, 159, 273, 304, 349
MONEY, 33, 102
POSSESSIONS, 33
SELF-ESTEEM, 32, 55, 102
SEX, 33
SOCIAL ESTEEM, 32, 55, 102, 103,
104, 273, 310, 317
personal goal concerns, 59, 178, 185

personal goal outcomes
side effect, 39, 109
personal goal set
apparent incompleteness of, 34
apparent incorrectness of, 34
personal goals 31, 98, 138, 263
as tasks of a program, 102
cheating at achievement of, 102
dynamic importance of, 109
English generation of, 356
external criteria for achievement of,
102
improvement at achieving, 99
interaction among, 33
primitive set of, 31
personality disorders, 270
personality traits, 39, 156
persons 34
as memory indices, 187
English generation of, 360
pervasiveness of emotional state, 62
Pfeifer, Rolf, 17, 49, 78, 227, 228, 293, 295
phenomenological equivalence, 259
phenomenology, 17, 19, 72, 74, 235, 238,
239, 240, 255
philosophical underpinnings, 233
phrasal patterns, 271
phrase structure grammar, 275
physical constraints, 162
physical harm, 69
physical level, 239, 260
physical objects 14, 34, 97, 130
as memory indices, 131, 187
English generation of, 359
input of, 178
physical possibility, 256
physiological changes, 62

physiological needs, 10, 32, 101
physiology
importance of, 255
Pichler, F., 283
pineal gland, 234
pity, 73
plan proposer, 140
plan understanding, 143
plan-no-gen slot, 362

INDEX

385

Plan-only, 174
plane trips, 162
planner procedure, 44, 178, 179
planning 22, 31, 35, 38, 57
analogical algorithm for, 90
daydreaming and, 7, 8, 144, 145, 212,
9A PPA PHYA IPM (ORY
for preservation goals, 106
other, 153

previous work in, 137
recursive, 154

regular algorithm for, 90
traditional paradigm for, 12, 98
planning mechanism 30, 263, 335
traces of, 305

rule application
178, 183

procedure

46,

revised version, 189
planning rules 30, 35, 57, 86, 87, 153, 159,

179, 263
application of, 179
examples of, 175, 176
for actions, 175
general form of, 173, 174
planning

trees,

positive emotions, 39, 220
positive-vivid daydreaming

factor,

220,

225
possession, 34

POSSESSIONS
English generation of, 356

paradigm for, 12, 98

planning

Popek, Gerald J., 179, 293
Posey, Thomas B., 224, 295
positive attitudes, 67, 155
positive consequences, 98

87, 89, 90, 96, 128,

possible worlds, 172
postdiction, 261
precedence
of existing analogical plans, 133
of satisfied states, 133
preconditions 87, 176, 183, 306
lack of, 176
preconscious, 217, 274

predicates, 172
predictions 95, 100
of a theory, 247, 252
preparation stage, 135

PRESERVATION
English generation of, 361
187,

193
plans
future, 87
Plauger, P. J., 257, 290

plausibility, 52, 143
plausibility slot, 174, 180

plausible mutation, 99
plausible planning, 163
plausible rules, 35
play, 216, 221, 222
pleasant episode, 332
pleasure, 51, 54, 217
pleasure principle, 32, 71
plot units, 64, 65
plots, 224, 266
Plummer, Dave, 98, 116, 284

Plutchik, Robert, 67, 71, 79, 82, 295
poets, 267

Pohl, I., 127, 128, 295
Poincaré, Henri, 15, 134, 135, 295
point of a story, 146

point of departure, 19
pointers, 254
poise, 55

political ideologies, 39
Pollack, Jordan B., 200, 243, 300
Polya, G., 15, 295
Pope, Kenneth S., 2, 6, 19, 21, 25, 26, 50,
62, 130, 200, 223, 290, 295, 298

preservation goals, 97, 105, 106, 161, 328
pretzel, 275

Pribram, K. H., 114, 292
pride, 55
primary emotions, 56, 75, 77
primary memory, 235
primary motivating emotion, 64
primary process thought, 222
prime mover, 81
priming, 259
primitive action slot, 152
principle of association, 211
principle of rationality, 239, 241
Principles of Psychology, 213

PRISM, 200, 201
problem solving
as search, 137, 138, 139

daydreaming and, 137, 144
emotions and, 16
experience and, 138
mutation and, 132
paradigm for, 12, 122, 138
previous work in, 137

protocols of, 25
randomness and, 131, 133
traditional paradigm for,
137
problem space, 137
procedural nets, 139
procedure
action mutation, 48, 194

12,’ 121,

INDEX

386

analogical rule application, 47, 189
concern initiation, 46, 178, 186
concern termination, 45, 178, 181
emotion-driven control, 44, 178
episode retrieval, 46, 187
episode storage, 46, 187
inference rule application, 46, 178,

184
initialization, 182
planner, 44, 178, 179
planning rule application,

46, 178,

183
reminding, 47, 188
revised planning rule

application,

189
rule application, 45, 178, 182, 191
serendipity recognition, 47, 192
subgoal creation, 189
procedures 169
dependencies of, 178, 186, 192
for daydreaming, 178
process merge, 279
process split, 279
production rules, 268, 281
production systems, 278
productive thinking, 123
program correctness, 249
program tailoring, 272, 273
program verification, 249
programming languages, 169, 179, 235,
255
progressive relaxation, 62
progressive unification, 193, 264
projection, 79
projector, 140
proliferation of episodes, 95
Prolog, 181
pronouns
English generation of, 360
propositions, 80, 226
protection violations, 182

analysis of, 57, 277

methods for gathering, 23
verbal vs. nonverbal, 223
prototypes, 245
Proust, Marcel, 74
pruning, 56, 133
psychiatrist, 17, 76, 85, 269
psychoanalysis, 25, 227, 274
psychological evidence, 50, 51, 60, 63, 68,

T0573, (86) 215, 132) 133h155
261

experiments,

PTRANS, 19, 153, 170, 175
purpose-directed analogy, 118
Pylyshyn,

Zenon W., 235, 239, 240, 241,

247, 258, 259, 260, 295
Pythagoras, 124
Potzl, O., 275, 295
QA4, 172
quantization
of sameness, 260
quantum mechanical effects, 235
quasi-needs, 116
questionnaire, 26, 219, 240

Quillian, M. Ross, 86, 127, 128, 198, 208,
213, 295
Quinn, Naomi,

152, 296

RAND, 175
Randell, B., 179, 296
random access machine, 258, 259
random episode, 332
random input, 97
random mutation, 99
randomness of daydreams, 9
Rapaport, David, 6, 26, 108, 213, 217, 261,
283, 291, 296, 298
rationality principle, 239, 241
rationalization 4, 5, 17, 38, 60, 63, 64, 65,

66; 80;"81, 828 107103264;
311, 319, 325, 329, 330
activation of, 64
as attribution, 66

cognitive dissonance and, 80
definition of, 63

external attribution strategy for, 66,
82
function of, 61

hidden blessing strategy for, 65, 80,
82
introduction of term, 79

protocols#29119) 21023537, 2005217, 222:
223, 256

psychological

psychological needs, 102
Psychology of Day-dreams, 217
psychotherapy, 82, 215, 227, 269

52, 128, 258,

long-term impact of, 270
minimization strategy for, 66, 80, 82,
332, 363

mixed blessing strategy for, 64, 80,
82
previous computer model of, 80
strategies for, 64, 326, 329, 332
Raye, Carol L., 24, 87, 289
reaction times

Turing equivalence and, 259
reaction-time experiments, 259, 260

readiness potentials, 275
reading, 1
real experiences 86

INDEX

387

application to daydream of, 91, 93
application to real experiences of, 94

forgetting of, 86
real world, 180
realism, 21
realism assessments

remindings 14, 97, 116, 130, 188, 223, 327,
333

111

importance of, 163
realism

concerns and, 131

metric 51, 52, 96, 106, 109, 110,

L222
264, 334
calculation of, 110
reality context, 180, 182,

relevance heuristics, 96
relevant features, 111
relief, 53, 54, 65, 107, 329
reminding procedure, 47, 188

163)

LSOma sie

English generation of, 363
remove-slot-values (operation), 170
repair
during

185, 193, 303,

305, 306, 307, 317
reality monitoring, 87
reality principle, 32
reasonable responses, 102

reasons for failure, 106
recency, 213
recent episodes, 188
recent indices, 188, 193, 333
reconstructive memory, 24
records, 169
recovery 264, 273, 311, 320, 333, 342
achievement of, 333
activation of, 108
emotional impact of, 108
recovery blocks, 179
recurrent daydreams, 94
recursion, 254
recursive descent, 30
redundant discrimination nets, 196
Reed, David P., 179, 296
Rees, Jonathan A., 169, 296
references

application

conceptual vs. emotional, 75
conceptual vs.
phenomenological,
241
limitations of, 152
of emotions, 18, 53
of experiences, 87, 96, 213
syntax and, 240
representational conflict, 242
representational incompleteness, 241
repressed infantile wishes, 214, 219
repression, 24, 79, 135, 217, 270, 277
repulsion, 80
requests, 317
research objectives, 5
resistance, 24, 274
resolve conflicts critic, 140
respondent segments, 222

retract (operation), 173
retrieval thresholds, 188

regression, 128, 193
regressive thought, 230
regret, 51, 55, 65, 66, 107
regularity detection, 245
regulated thought, 212
rehearsal 8, 107, 221, 264, 271
emotional impact of, 108
Reik, Theodor, 25, 26, 267, 274, 296
reinterpret final goal, 80

retrieve (operation) 173
examples of, 173

reinterpretation, 9, 50

relaxed unification, 272
relaxed wakefulness, 230

90,

representation 10, 56, 152, 240
artistic, 267

English generation of, 360

Reiser, Brian J., 89, 196, 203, 296
rejection, 55, 59
relationships, see interpersonal relationships
relative goal importance, 39
relaxation of constraints, 162
relaxation techniques, 62
relaxed analogical planning, 273

of episodes,

91, 94, 95, 98, 348
replanning, 106
replaying past experiences, 195

retrospective reports 2, 23, 87, 217

methods for obtaining, 23
revenge 4, 17, 26, 58, 60, 62, 67, 112, 145,
218, 264,270, 273, 320, 321,
347
achievement of, 69
activation of, 68
function of, 68, 69
physical harm strategy for, 69
turning the tables strategy

325
reverie, 20 see also daydreaming
reversal 264, 271, 311, 320
achievement of, 104
activation of, 103

emotional impact of, 107
examples of, 103
of success, 103

for, 69,

INDEX

388

runable concern, 183
Russell, Bertrand, 234, 297

revision, 12, 142, 146
Rieger, Chuck, 247, 298
Riesbeck, Christopher K., 35, 128,

169,

170, 172, 195, 278, 284, 297
Ringle, Martin H., 290, 298
risk metric, 110
Ritchie, Dennis M., 85, 296

RNOT,

175

Robertson, Scott P., 274, 278, 289
Robinson, J. A., 35, 128, 296

robot
household, 16, 265
robotics, 2, 76, 265
rollback, 266

romantic fantasy stage, 219
romantic interest, 155, 156, 313

ROR, 175
Rosenblatt, F., 243, 296
Rosenbloom, Paul S., 118, 296
Ross, W. D., 283
Rothenberg, Albert, 39, 122,

123, 124,
135, 296
round-robin processing, 43
roving 60, 61, 70, 264, 270, 311, 320, 332
activation of, 70

strategies for, 332
RSEQ, 174, 175
RTRUE, 87
rule application procedure,

Sacerdoti, Earl D., 15, 115, 121, 139, 164,
181, 278, 297
sadness, 54, 79
safety mechanism, 7
Salaman, Esther, 74, 75, 297
salient features, 203, 204, 245
sameness of algorithms, 260
satiation, 55
satisfaction, 54, 60

satisfied state precedence, 133
scaling problem, 276
scenario
definition of, 23
Schachter, S., 49, 53, 277, 297

Schank, Roger C., 6, 12, 32, 33, 34, 35,
43, 85, 89, 95, 147, 151, 152,
155, 157, 169) divi7j@2065)2415
242, 245, 267, 284, 287, 297
schemas 203, 243, 245

learning of, 203, 245
Scheme, 169
Schiller, Johann C. F. v., 123
schizophrenia, 216
Schlosberg, H., 135, 301

Schneider, Henri, 227, 228, 293
Schneider, W., 227, 228
45, 178, 182,

191

rule connection graph 47, 128, 184, 192
creation of, 184
rule creation, 97
rule induction, 344
rule intersection search 47, 128, 131, 192,

264, 279
applicable rules for, 128
implementation of, 192
spreading activation vs., 203
rule priorities, 278
rule-induction-driven serendipity, 126
rules 35, 86, 263
application of, 45, 182
examples of, 174, 175, 176, 177
for actions, 175
for concern activation, 177
general form of, 173
modification of, 243
plausible, 163
rules of logic, 217
Rulifson, J., 172, 296
Rumelhart, David E., 200, 203, 204, 205,
206, 208, 213, 243, 244, 245,
280, 281, 288, 291, 292, 294,
296, 297, 299

Schneider, Werner, 293
Schwartz, G. E., 295
science, 222
scientific community metaphor, 125
scientific explanation, 72, 246, 251, 253

scientific objectives, 247
scientific underpinnings, 247
Scoring System for Latent Structure, 225
Scott, T. H-| 16, 283

scrambling function, 246
scripts, 95, 182, 243

scruffy approach, 276
search 12, 91, 96, 98, 100, 117, 122, 128,
133, 137, 138, 139, 264
by programmer, 272
conflict between reduction and increase of, 132
depth-first, 179
emotions and, 56

through space of scenarios, 137
seasonal changes, 74
secondary memory, 235
secondary process thought, 222
secondary revision, 215, 276
secondhand experiences, 86, 327
Segal, B., 220, 289, 297
segments, 21, 25, 36, 222

INDEX

389

selection, 109
selective forgetting, 135
self, 35, 154, 191
self-actualization, 32, 101
self-entertainment, 165, 221
self-esteem, 60
self-pity, 78
Selfridge, Oliver G., 209, 297

shame, 55, 56, 75
Shanon, Benny, 132, 223, 224, 297

semantic connectionism, 247

semantic level, 239, 241, 260
semantic memory 86, 95, 96

modified through reversal, 103
semantics 246
absolute, 240

Shao Mai, 265
Shapero, Harold, 267, 298
Shapiro, D., 295
shared daydreaming, 271
Shaw, J. C., 12, 31, 121, 137, 294
Sheehan, P. W., 298
Shepard, Roger N., 19, 298
shift in perspective, 223
shift of attention, 20
shift of processing, 183
shifting of concerns, 36, 38, 345

shifting the topic, 17

functionalist approach to, 241

short-term

of the stream of consciousness, 240

138, 198, 199, 281
consciousness and, 199, 281
Shortliffe, Edward H., 36, 52, 110, 163,
298
side effects, 39, 64, 109, 264

the problem of, 239
sensory deprivation, 16
sensory experiences, 19
sensory perceptions, 21
sentiments, 155
serendipity 13, 14, 39, 55, 97, 114, 121,

125, 132,
309, 348
cases of, 125

138, 183, 304, 307,

concern-activation-driven,

126

episode retrieval and, 129
episode-driven, 125, 129
external environment and, 14

finding of new solutions via, 126
fleshing out a, 125, 127, 132, 134,
282, 335, 337
illumination and, 136
in narratives, 146
input-state-driven, 126, 132

learning and, 126
merging events and, 278
mutation-driven, 126
object-driven, 125, 130
occurrence of, 125
recognition of, 127, 129, 132
rule-induction-driven, 126

unanticipated, 271
verification of, 128, 193
serendipity mechanism 30, 122, 125, 192,

264, 279, 335, 344, 349
action mutation and, 134
multiple roles of, 282

serendipity recognition procedure, 47, 192
serendipity-based learning, 126

set-type (operation), 170
settling phenomenon,
sexual fantasies, 151
sexual instinct, 32
sexual preference, 20

135

memory

8, 24, 43, 116, 135,

side effects of a theory, 261

signal detection tasks, 221
Silberer, Herbert, 21, 230, 298
silicon compilation, 251
Silver, Bernard, 98, 116, 284
similarity metric 109, 110, 112, 117, 180

calculation of, 110
Simon, Herbert A., 2, 12, 14, 24, 31, 76,
117, 121, 135,136, Taine 143s
149, 195, 199, 200, 239, 286,
290, 294, 298
simple actions, 143
Simpson, Jr., Robert L., 6, 290
simulated real world 2, 265, 279, 303
initial state of, 30
Singer, J. E., 49, 53, 277, 297
Singer, Jerome L., 2, 6, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 25, 50, 62; 68, 70,-87, 94,
116, 123, 151, 165, 219, 220,
221 267, 27157280283) 288;
289, 290, 295, 297, 298
situational tags, 181
skill, 8
Skinner, B. F., 222, 298
sleep, 230, 277
slips of the tongue, 277
Sloman, Aaron, 76, 298
slot names, 169
slot values, 169
slot-filler objects 169, 271
contents of, 169
operations on, 170
printing of, 170

reading of, 170
Slovic, P., 289

INDEX

390

slow eye movements, 230
Small, Steven, 247, 298
smell, 74
smile, 36
Smirnov, A. A., 24, 86, 299
Smith, B., 255, 299
Smith, David E., 276, 299
Smolensky, Paul, 204, 205, 244, 245, 281,
297, 299
soap, 74
social class, 34
social consequences, 164
social constraints, 162

stereotypes, 152
stimulus-dependent thought, 21, 130
stimulus-independent thought, 130
stochastic composition, 269
Stoller, Robert J., 151, 299
story understanding, see narrative comprehension
story generation, 144, 266

274 see also daydreaming
architectural element for, 239
as merged result, 279, 280

aspects of, 213
importance of, 238, 277
objective definition of, 237
subjectiveness of, 235
stream of experience, 231

sonar, 236
soul, 234

sound, 74
source goal, 89
source nodes, 199
space of contexts, 179
space of possible plans, 139
space of world models, 137
special slot-filler objects, 171
species
survival of, 101
specification, 223
spectator, 228
speed

stream of thought 2, 3, 18, 20, 23, 24, 130,
135, 195, 213, 231 see also day-

dreaming
importance of, 277
strength
of a fact, 185
strings, 169, 170

STRIPS 12, 118, 137, 139, 140
DAYDPREAMER vs., 137, 138
strong equivalence 258, 261

learning and, 98
spontaneous thought, 245
128,

steering of thought, 21

stream of consciousness 20, 21, 23, 26, 213,

software engineering, 257

activation

statistics, 167, 168
Steele Jr., Guy Lewis, 255, 299

Stoy, J. E., 241, 299
strange thoughts, 231

social esteem, 82
social interaction, 267
social psychology, 155
society of mind, 43, 280
Sofer, Ken, 269, 299

spreading

long-term, 104
representation of, 152

198,

199, 213,

215, 243, 244, 259, 281
connectionism vs., 200, 208
discrimination nets vs., 203

expense of, 200
for episode retrieval, 200
problems with, 202
spreading to a depth, 200

spreading to a limit, 200, 201
sprout (operation), 173
sprouting plans, 90, 305, 306
SSLS, 225
stability, 77
stable pattern of activation, 203, 208
stacks, 181

standard theory, 275
Starker, Steven, 225, 299
state slot, 152
states 12, 183

English generation of, 353

problems with, 259, 260
Structure and Functions of Fantasy, 222
structure-content distinctions, 239

structuregram, 226
structures, 169
stubs, 257
sub-episodes, 89, 110

subgoal creation procedure, 189

subgoal relaxation 164, 315, 317
English generation and, 361
subgoal slot, 174
subgoaling, 87, 117

subgoals 87, 98
actions and, 179
activation of, 90
English generation of, 357, 362, 363
success of, 179
subject

English generation of, 352
subjective experiences 17, 19, 72, 74, 235,
238, 239, 240, 255

391

INDEX

assessment of, 240
definition of, 237
generalizations about, 240
subjective viewpoint, 237
sublimation, 79
subliminal perception, 275
subroutines, PupLDL

subsumption, 33, 143, 152
subsumption state, 33

terms for emotions, 54
terrorism, 162
testimony, 87
text comprehension, see narrative comprehension
textual representation, 169, 170
thematic abstraction units, 65

themes, 177
theorem prover, 16

subtle memory modifications, 87

therapy, 59

success reversal, 103

theta EEG, 230

Suinn, Richard M., 8, 299
summary of theory, 263
Pe hot $4, 227, 228

uppes, P., 82, 299

surface structure, 275
surprise 39, 55, 182, 183, 193, 308
fortuitous subgoal success and, 114

illumination and, 136
; serendipity and, 114
rhea 101
Bas
*

*

*

ee”

suspension of judgment, 123

Sussman, Gerald Jay, 15, 117, 255, 299
switching system, 247
Sycara-Cyranski,6 Katia, 6, 290

symbol level, 239, 260

sytmbol-semantics boundary, 260

Aa
ger OO?ee
fatetbes we :
xdss
,
table for emotion generation, 56
tailoring, 272, 273
TALE-SPIN 14, 144
DAYDREAMER vz., 145
talking to oneself, 18
Tannenbaum, P., 155, 295
target goal, 89
Tarnopolsky, Yuri, 245, 299

Tart, Charles T., 21, 291, 299

task network, 140, 142

task-irrelevant thought, 130, 221
taste, 74

TAU-HIDDEN-BLESSING, 65

TAUs, 65
team fantasy stage, 219

telephone switching system, 247
telephones, 247
teletype, 257
tendency to complete tasks, 114
tender emotion, 80
terminal 170
protocols collected on, 3
terminal velocity, 251

think-aloud protocols, 25, 26, 223
think-in-writing protocol, 26
thinking machine, 254

Thompson, Ken, 43, 85, 296, 299

thought
association and. 211
autistic, 216
Ks

conversation and, 267
degenerate, 21
dimensions of, 20, 26

directed, 20, 21, 222
dream. 222

OE se
fore-conscious, 217
integrated,
21
“4
3

nonconscious, 20, 74, 79, 214, 217
Hanscusicals

246

primary process, 222
realism of, 21
regressive, 230
regulated, 212
secondary process, 222
spontaneous, 245
stimulus-dependent, 21, 130

stimulus-independent, 130
strange, 231
task-irrelevant, 130, 221

undirected, 20

unguided, 212

verbal, 56

voluntary, 20, 231, 275

thought experiments, 85

thought sampling, 26

threats, 60
three-dimensional rotation, 19

thresholds, 33, 39, 106, 111, 112, 128, 178,
188, 278, 281, 329, 332, 342
time, 217
time constraints, 98

time perception, 236
time restrictions, 37
Titchener, E. B., 239, 299
toilet paper, 235

INDEX

392

Tomkins, Silvan S., 39, 55, 56, 71, 75, 77,
283, 284, 299
top rule, 128, 194
top-down approach, 253
top-level goals 36, 55, 59
activation of, 178, 185, 304, 342
failure of, 56, 179, 182, 317

success of, 179, 182, 187
touched facts, 184
Touretzky, David S., 246, 300
trace strengths, 199, 201
traits, 39, 156
transactions, 179, 266
transference, 228
transform space, 117
transformations, 81, 82, 132,
251, 275, 278, 279
transforms, 81
Trappl, R., 283

223,

227,

utterances

tree

leaves of, 87
tree of contexts, 179
tree of goals, 87
tricking the system, 102
Tulving, Endel, 10, 86, 300
tuning
of weights, 202
Turing equivalence, 259
Turing machines, 235, 244, 258, 259, 260
Turing test, 255, 257
Turing, Alan M., 235, 257, 300
Turing-like tests, 257
turning the tables, 69, 325
Tversky, A., 51, 289
two-valued logic, 104
type 169
of a variable, 171
type hierarchy, 169
UAND, 171
UCLA, 127, 344
unbound variables, 128, 171
unconscious, 217, 274
unconscious thought, 20 see also nonconscious thought
unconsciousness, 236
underdetermination, 277
understanding

of human daydreaming, 247
spectrum of, 242
undirected thought, 20
undo mechanism, 181
UNDO-CAUSES
reversal strategy
116, 142
examples of, 105, 108
undoing changes, 179

unexplored contexts, 106
unfinished business, 116, 221
unguided thought, 212
unhappiness, 54
unification 35, 87, 128, 169, 183, 264, 268,
305, 312, 349
definition of, 170
examples of, 170
relaxed, 272
rule application and, 174
United States, 196
universal subgoaling, 17, 37
UNIX, 85
UNOT, 171
unrealistic solutions, 12
unresolved conflicts, 227
UOR, 171
UPROG, 171
overdetermination in, 274, 278
valences, 116
value slot, 152

Vance, Cyrus, 196, 197
Varendonck, J., 2, 15, 17, 19, 20, 23, 24,
25, 50, 63, 71, 87, 135, 136, 200,
217, 218, 219, 300
variabilization 97, 105, 116, 169
definition of, 172
examples of, 172

variable bindings, 170
variables 170, 304, 305

English generation of, 304
propagation of, 305

type of, 171
unbound, 128, 171
variations on a theme, 124, 269
Venice, 209

verb particles, 361
verbs

English generation of, 351
verification (branch of computer science),
249
verification of path, 128
verification stage, 135
Vietnam war, 221
viewpoints, 172
virtual machine, 240

virtual memory, 272

104,

vision, 282
visual music, 269
visualization, 8
voices, 74
voluntary thought 20, 231, 275
overdetermination and, 277
Von Zeppelin, Ilka, 227, 228, 293

INDEX

voting, 276, 280
waiting concern, 183, 306
waking up, 224
Waldinger, R., 172, 296

Wallast

Gino 1225134135.) 136, 218)
300
Waltz, David L., 19, 200, 243, 300
Warren, H., 82, 299

Warren, H. C., 211, 213, 300
Waterman, D. A., 290
Watkins, M. M., 236, 300
Watson, John B., 238, 300
Weiner, Bernard, 50, 53, 59, 73, 77, 300
Weizenbaum, Joseph, 255, 258, 300
Wertheimer, Max, 15, 123, 133, 300
Western Electric No. 1A ESS, 250
Whitney, John, 269, 300

Wilensky, Robert, 7, 15, 16, 17, 31, 37, 43,
57, 115, 121, 140, 141, 142, 143,
144, 151, 155, 181, 297, 300
Williams, M. D., 196, 300
Wilson, T. D., 238, 294
window, 170
Winston, Patrick H., 169, 235, 276, 292,

300, 301
Wirth, Niklaus, 169, 301
wish-fulfillment, 70, 162, 214, 216, 277
wishes 31, 214, 219
abstract, 227

Woodworth, R. S., 135, 301
words
correctness of, 56
for emotions, 54
working memory, see short-term memory
world models, 35
worry, 51, 55, 64, 72, 107, 108, 220
worrying, 271
writing, 87
Xenakis, Iannis, 269, 301
Zajonc, R. B., 75, 301
Zernik, Uri, 169, 293
Zipser, David, 204, 205, 243, 244, 297

393

Se

vee! uf, =
mot (0G,

irs,

oer

OF - ——

tanks, 7 tA spain it
iw

—

Lalind,

ey

> @S),

So a

a? maniehy
vn lag Vly

-&

te Bp

ss

=r

Wiaes i

pA-—

a

Vict cine
et

:

(,

Se"

eR

Whe

ae

ions

eal

Lid-roe

$068

unt

n

-~

sf

&

0

U

os
a

3K,

»

Piateglite tats,
;

all

ia

belies

en

41

“

———ae
her oo! “7
i
et

-

~

Le]

a,

mology
\

“4

“yy

eee

ne,

pS erie
Biagio, gre

@nithoa,

46

1.)

'

i}

a

‘“

™

mn)

¥

$0667

vheewding,

i

ois

%

be
:

wes eyed
ny

i

2g.

.

ahr :

Veta,

va
Whol snaigeey TB,
rrebinn, 189
‘

{

“
“

of pa 7;

—
Wheat.sng saat oe

davai,

|

4144

haa
@ pie

thapal tale, Cu
=

ae

;
>.

:

-

the

~~

*

aes

~

i

Dan!

TF

|
a

|
vi \

\
.

7

7

7 ; si
Ay *

Printed
in USA

HIGHSMITH #45230

UN

eames

WITAURAWN, F.S.

U.

CRSTENRSOE,

MUTT
AOC0

ISBN: 0-89391-562-9

