FAtiMA Toolkit - Toward an effective and accessible
tool for the development of intelligent virtual agents
and social robots
Samuel Mascarenhas, Manuel Guimarães, Pedro A. Santos, , Rui Prada, Ana
Paiva
INESC-ID & Instituto Superior Técnico
Universidade de Lisboa, Portual
samuel.mascarenhas@gaips.inesc-id.pt
manuel.m.guimaraes@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
rui.prada@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
pedro.santos@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
ana.paiva@inesc-id.pt,
João Dias,
INESC-ID & Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade do Algarve &
CCMAR

Abstract
More than a decade has passed since the development of FearNot!, an application
designed to help children deal with bullying through role-playing with virtual
characters. It was also the application that led to the creation of FAtiMA, an
affective agent architecture for creating autonomous characters that can evoke
empathic responses. In this paper, we describe FAtiMA Toolkit, a collection
of open-source tools that is designed to help researchers, game developers and
roboticists incorporate a computational model of emotion and decision-making
in their work. The toolkit was developed with the goal of making FAtiMA
more accessible, easier to incorporate into different projects and more flexible in
its capabilities for human-agent interaction, based upon the experience gathered
over the years across different virtual environments and human-robot interaction
scenarios. As a result, this work makes several different contributions to the field
of Agent-Based Architectures. More precisely, FAtiMA Toolkit’s library based
design allows developers to easily integrate it with other frameworks, its metacognitive model affords different internal reasoners and affective components
and its explicit dialogue structure gives control to the author even within highly
complex scenarios. To demonstrate the use of FAtiMA Toolkit, several different
use cases where the toolkit was successfully applied are described and discussed.
Keywords: Embodied Agents, Affective Computing, Cognitive Architecture,
Emotions, Social Robots

1. Introduction
FAtiMA Toolkit is a collection of tools designed to be used in tandem for the
creation of cognitive agents with socio-emotional skills. The toolkit was developed in the context of the RAGE1 and Slice 2 projects with the goal of improving
the FAtiMA Modular agent architecture [1]. FAtiMA was initially developed in
2005 for the purpose of driving the behaviour of autonomous 3D characters in
a serious game about bullying [2] (the acronym stands for Fearnot AffecTIve
Mind Architecture). At the time, its distinguishing feature was a computational
model of an emotion theory named OCC [3] that affected the character’s planning and behavioural reactions. Since then, many other computational models
of social and psychological constructs were added to the architecture. Some
examples include empathy [4], psychological drives [5] and culture [6]. The addition of all these constructs had a significant impact on the complexity of using
the architecture. To facilitate this problem, a modular version was developed
[1] that allowed users to turn off the cognitive modules they were not interested
in using for their scenarios. Still, other usability issues remained in the modular
version, which can also be found in other similar agent-based tools.
In a twenty year retrospective article about pedagogical agents [7], Lewis
and Johnson recognize that, despite the fact that there is plenty of empirical
evidence of the effectiveness in the use of agents to promote learning, the lack of
better tools for creating such agents is severely diminishing a more widespread
adoption. Naturally, researchers have limited resources to spend on documenting, marketing, and supporting the tools they develop for doing research and
this affects adoption by outsiders. However, there are more relevant and recurring problems in the design and implementation of agent-based tools that
further aggravate this issue. Some of the problems are more of a technical nature such as the use of monolithic systems that do not favor heterogeneity of
components, the framework paradigm, and how complex systems handle realtime interactions, but others can be more conceptual, such as how to explicitly
structure the dialogue system (central vs distributed approach) or the lack of
tools that facilitate the process of authoring characters and situations. These
problems require a more flexible approach than the ones often used in cognitive
agents.
In this document we discuss some of these problems, such as the ones mentioned before, and our proposed solutions that guided the creation of FAtiMA
Toolkit. In particular, we will discuss the use of meta-cognition, which broadly
speaking refers to the human capacity of “thinking about thinking”, as a solution. This capacity was represented by introducing meta-beliefs that are
associated to dynamic reasoning processes, thus allowing for non-declarative
knowledge to be interwoven together with declarative knowledge within a unified rule-based system. The added flexibility from this approach allowed us to
1 http://rageproject.eu/
2 https://gaips.inesc-id.pt/slice/project.html

2

tackle the identified problems, as described later in the paper. Our goal is that
these solutions can serve as guidelines to other researchers that are developing
similar systems.
To showcase the added flexibility and ease of application to different interactive environments and settings, we will describe different case studies where the
FAtiMA Toolkit has been successfully applied. We will start with two commercial videogames that were developed by an external company using the toolkit:
Space Modules, where players have to solve problems of customers that can be
more or less angry and Sports Team Manager, where players most assemble the
most optimally performing sailing team by resolving conflicts and managing the
interactions between teammates. We also describe a Virtual Reality experience,
a Game Jam involving FAtiMA and how a search algorithm such as Monte Carlo
Tree Search was implemented in the Toolkit and applied to a survival game. Finally we will present some the results of using FAtiMA in a course on Game AI
at IST, University of Lisbon, for the past 3 years and how we used the toolkit
to investigate the impact of group-based emotions in a robotic partner.
In the remainder of this document we will start with a brief analysis of
related work on computational models, frameworks, and tools for the development of socio-emotional agents. Next we will start by providing an overview
of how FAtiMA Toolkit works along with its core components in Section 3. In
the following two sections: 4 and 5 we will describe the main innovations of
FAtiMA Toolkit. Agent-based frameworks have been found to create problems
for their users and developers. For instance, having a monolithic structure for
agent based development is quite inflexible and restrictive, hence we decided to
use a library based design where each component is independent of the others.
In these two sections 4 and 5 we discuss how we addressed these issues and
the thought process behind our solutions. The first section describes the framework paradigm and our library based design and how the the introduction of
meta-beliefs and reasoners allowed us to seamless integrate multiple cognitive
processes. The latter sections delved into how and why we moved towards an explicit dialog structure that combines advantages of dialog tree structures with
agent-based decision making. The following Section 6 depicts the authoring
tool created and its purpose. Finally the paper ends with the description and
analysis of some of case studies that were created in past year with a conclusion.
2. Related Work
As a cognitive agent architecture, the cornerstone of FAtiMA is its ability to
synthesize emotions in a way that is grounded on human psychology with a particular focus on social interaction. Adopting a more physiological approach, the
PSI model [8] establishes a cognitive motivation-based theory that aims at modeling the human psyche by formalizing its functioning in a computer simulation
that regulates its needs autonomously. In PSI, all actions and behaviour ultimately have the purpose of achieving a finite set of primary, predefined drives.
Instead of modeling explicit emotion categories, PSI sees emotions as emerging from specific modulations of cognitive and motivational processes. These
3

modulations are realized by emotional parameters. Depending on the cognitive
resources and the motivational state of the organism in a given situation, these
parameters are adjusted, resulting in more or less careful or forceful ways of
acting, as well as more or less deliberate cognitive processing. For instance, in
the case of an event triggering an high arousal, it is likely that the system needs
to react urgently to the situation at hand, which requires a fast decision process.
PSI is an example of a physiologically inspired model, of which the Cathexis
model [9] and the work of Cañamero [10] are additional examples. Another
type of a cognitive architecture that explores the interplay between several cognitive processes (e.g. reactive, deliberative) and sees emotions as mechanisms
to regulate these processes is Sloman’s CogAff framework [11]. Although these
type of models are very useful to understand and explain cognitive, behavioural
and emotional processes, such complex and sometimes low-level descriptions of
behaviour are not helpful to design socio-emotional characters for storytelling
based scenarios, where simpler models are easier to understand and to use.
EMA [12, 13, 14] is an appraisal-based computational model that follows
Smith and Lazarus’s cognitive-motivational-emotive psychological theory [15],
and extends SOAR [16] by incorporating emotions. In EMA, appraisal and
coping are built on the causal representations developed for decision-theoretic
planning augmented by explicit cognitive representations of desires, intentions,
beliefs, the state of current plans and corresponding probabilities. Considering
the example where a flying bird suddenly enters the room, EMA analyses the
impact of this event in its current plans and goals. It discovers that there is a
plausible hypothesis where the bird attacks and injures the agent. This possible
future event creates a threat to an existing goal (being healthy), which will be
considered undesirable and will then generate an emotion. Coping strategies
are proposed to maintain desirable or overthrow undesirable in-focus emotion
instances.
The WASABI architecture [17, 18] follows a dimensional approach where
it simulates the whole agent’s emotional state as a point in a continuous the
three-dimensional space PAD (Pleasure, Arousal and Dominance). Pleasure determines the intrinsic contribution of an event to the agent’s well being. Arousal
represents the agent’s level of being awake and reactive to stimuli. Finally, Dominance represents the agent’s perceived capability to change the environment or
the cause of the event causing a given emotion. Whenever an emotionally relevant event is perceived, the pleasantness of the event is appraised, generating an
emotional impulse that will change the current level of pleasure and arousal in
the PAD space, and which will slowly decay towards a neutral level. The level of
Dominance is determined from the situational context from the cognitive layer
of architecture. Primary emotions are used to trigger the corresponding facial
expressions, while secondary emotions are sent to the deliberation component
which can use this information to activate particular behaviours. We believe
that this mechanism of making decisions based on emotional state information
is important for an emotional agent architecture. However, while in WASABI
the actual decision making-rules are tightly coupled to the implementation, in
FAtiMA toolkit we adopted a declarative approach that allow authors to specify
4

their own rules on how emotions affect behaviour, by using meta-beliefs about
the agent’s emotional state.
The Virtual Human Toolkit [19] is a well known architecture that is also designed to facilitate the creation of autonomous conversational characters. Moreover, the architecture is also highly modular. However, unlike FAtiMA Toolkit,
the modules that are provided are focused in handling aspects that are more
related to the embodiment of a character rather than its cognitive abilities. For
example, the toolkit includes a multimodal sensing framework [20] and a nonverbal behaviour generator [21] that is based on the BML standard [22]. Another
distinguishing aspect is that the Virtual Human Toolkit adopts a framework approach that enforces the use of a message broker middleware for communicating
with the available modules.
GAMYGDALA [23] is a computational model of emotions that is based on
the OCC theory[24]. Similar to FAtiMA Toolkit, this emotional appraisal engine
was designed to be more accessible to game developers. In the perspective of
the authors, one of the issues with affective models that are tightly coupled to
a specific reasoner is that their use is limited to games where that specific type
of reasoning is desirable. With that in mind, GAMYDGALA implements an
appraisal mechanism that is independent from the how the characters reason.
Essentially, developers need only to provide a list of goals for each character
and then specify which events will block or facilitate each goal. Based on that
information, the engine will determine the changes made to the character’s
emotional state. Similar to GAMYGDALA, the appraisal engine in FAtiMA
Toolkit is an independent component that is not tied to a particular type of
reasoning. However, this is achieved in a different manner. Namely, developers
are able to incorporate their game-specific AI as meta-beliefs, which can then
be used by the appraisal process as regular beliefs.
The concept of meta-cognition, which refers to “cognition about cognitive
phenomena”[25] is one of the inspirations behind CLARION. CLARION [26]
is an example of a modularly structured cognitive architecture that explicitly
represents meta-cognitive mechanisms to enable a dual-process model of explicit
and implicit cognition. In [27] the author states that “without meta-cognitive
control, a model agent may be blindly single minded”. In order to promote a
greater flexibility in its core cognitive algorithms the notion of meta-cognition
was also integrated into FAtiMA Toolkit.
3. FAtiMA Toolkit and its Core Elements
FAtiMA Toolkit is a collection of tools and assets designed for the creation
of characters (virtual or robotic) with social and emotional intelligence. Figure
1 shows a diagram of all the existing components within FAtiMA Toolkit. Each
is the result of continued iterations and experience accumulated while working
with developers since the beginning of the RAGE project, now transitioning into

5

the Slice Project. The entire toolkit is open source and is available on GitHub3
and there are several resources, including Starter Kits, Demonstrations and
Tutorials in FAtiMA Toolkit’s official website 4 .

Figure 1: FAtiMA Toolkit Components.

An affective agent created with FAtiMA Toolkit will be initialized by the
Role Play Character component. The name of the component was chosen based
on the notion that FAtiMA agents are typically designed to be able to act
according to a specific social role in a coherent manner. This component is
responsible for managing the structures that constitute the internal state of
the agent: their beliefs, memory and emotional state. Authors can also add
more complex and believable behaviour to the agents, which we call Role Play
Characters, by using other components. For instance, in order for agents to be
able to perceive events in the world around them and have emotional reactions,
the Emotional Appraisal component can be used. To define the agents’ ability
to make decisions based on their beliefs and goals one can use the Emotional
Decision Making asset. All of these different components were developed as
libraries, which the developers or authors can directly import and explore more
easily without having to worry about compatibility issues. This is one of the
main contributions of this work and we will further discuss it in Section 4. We
will now describe the core elements that compose FAtiMA Toolkit
3 https://github.com/GAIPS-INESC-ID/FAtiMA-Toolkit
4 https://fatima-toolkit.eu/

6

3.1. Events
As typical of an agent model the main input are events. These can either
refer to properties that change or to actions that occur. In both cases, events
are represented as Well-Formed Names (WFNs). These names are strings that
follow a set of syntactic rules, which are based on the notions of symbols and
variables from first-order logic:
• Symbols represent constant entities (actions, objects, name of properties,
name of relations); e.g.: Attack, John, Table, Brown, Loves, A1,
etc; There is one special symbol, SELF, which is always automatically
replaced by the name of the agent.
• Variables are written between square brackets and represent an entity or
value that is not specified yet, which can be replaced by symbols; e.g.:
[ x ], [ target ];
• Composed names represent properties or relations between two or more
Symbols; e.g.:
Color ( Sky , Blue ), Has ( John , [ x ]);
As previously mentioned, events are represented as WFNs. More precisely,
they are composed names that have the following form:
Event ( Action - End , Sam , Turn ( On ) , TV )
Event ( Property - Change , Sam , State ( TV ) , On )
The first aforementioned example corresponds to an event where agent Sam
finishes the action of turning on the TV and the follow-up example is an event
indicating that the property TV ( Is ) changed its value to On due to agent Sam.
3.2. Role Play Character
The Role Play Character handles the events in the following manner. If
the event is a property change the corresponding belief in the KB is updated
accordingly. If the event concerns the performance of an action, the agents
checks if it recognizes the agent performing it. If not, the performer agent is
added to the list of known agents. Subsequently, the event is processed by
the Emotional Appraisal component, which updates the emotional state of the
agent with new emotions that the event might trigger. As will be detailed
later, this process uses a rule-based approach. Finally, the event is stored in the
Autobiographical Memory, registering the event’s logical name, the current time
and the emotions it caused.
The output of the Role Play Character are actions or, more precisely, highlevel decisions about which actions the agent should perform next. These actions
can be read by external components upon request. The execution of these actions is left in charge of modules that are more closely linked to the agent’s
embodiment, such as a behaviour scheduler or a speech synthesizer. This type

7

of modules fall outside the scope of FAtiMA Toolkit. To reach a decision, the
Role Play Character executes the algorithm defined in the Emotional Decision
Making and returns the result. Similar to the Emotional Appraisal this algorithm also uses a rule-based approach. More precisely, it goes through the list
of existing decision rules and applies, in each of them, a general unification algorithm between the list of the rule’s activation conditions and the agent’s set
of beliefs. The algorithm will find all the possible sets of valid substitutions
that satisfy the rule’s conditions. Each of these substitution sets will originate a
concrete decision to execute a certain action. To illustrate this process consider
the following example of a decision rule:
Action: Eat
Target: [ object ]
Priority: 1
Conditions:
Has ([ object ]) = True
Edible ([ object ]) = True
A single variable is present: [ object ]. As such, for this action to be
executed a valid substitution must be found for it. Consider the following set of
beliefs: “Has ( Bag ) = True, Has ( Apple ) = True, Edible ( Apple ) = True
”. In this situation the unification algorithm would unify [ object ] with
Apple but not with Bag as the latter fails to pass the last conditional check.
By expressing the agent’s decisions using conditions with logical variables
the action space of the agent grows and adapts according to its beliefs. This
means that if an agent is able to find another object that it believes to be edible
the previous rule would enable the action of eating it automatically. However,
this type of rule-based reasoning by itself can be quite limiting when trying
to handle scenarios that require a more complex decision-making strategy. For
example, consider an agent that is intended to be able to play a game of go or
poker in a proficient manner. In that case, it would be quite difficult to come
up with decision rules based on logical belief checks. Because of this limitation,
it is quite common to find other algorithms governing the decision-making of
an agent, such as heuristic search, planning, reinforcement learning and deep
learning. Any of these algorithms will be more advantageous in a particular
domain and less so in others. For instance, deep learning has become immensely
popular recently but it typically requires a large corpus of data to be useful.
Also, the original version of FAtiMA included a classical continuous planner
although it was difficult to explore its full capabilities in some conversational
domains.
3.3. Knowledge Base
Although the notion of beliefs and meta-beliefs has been already discussed,
there are two important aspects that have not yet been mentioned. The first
aspect is that the Knowledge Base is capable of storing beliefs about the beliefs
of other agents. In humans, this ability is referred to as a Theory of Mind. It
was implemented here by specifying an additional field for each belief named
8

perspective. The value of this field corresponds to the name of the agent
that holds the belief. By default, the unification algorithm uses the agent’s own
perspective when searching for valid substitutions. However, this can be changed
by using the following meta-belief in a condition: ToM ([ agent ] ,[ belief
]). This meta-belief will retrieve the value of [belief] from the perspective of
[agent]. Other meta-beliefs can also use this form of perspective-taking within
their algorithm as is the case of the Emotional Appraisal component when it is
inferring the emotional state of other agents.
The final important aspect about beliefs is that they also have certainty
value associated to them that can range from 0 to 1. The purpose of this value
is to affect the perceived utility of each decision as will be explained later when
describing the Emotional Decision Making component.
3.4. Emotional State
The Emotional State is the structure that holds the set of active emotions
the agent is currently experiencing. When defining the nature of emotion, there
were initially two main theoretical stances. The first of them considered that
emotions could be grouped in several distinct categories or types [28]. One of
the issues with this approach is that their proponents have quite different views
on how many categories exist and which criteria should be used to determine
if a certain type of emotion should be considered as a primary type or not.
This issue is exacerbated by the fact that some words used to describe emotions
exist in some languages but not in others [29]. Motivated by these issues, a
second theoretical stance proposes that emotions should be viewed as points in
a n-dimensional space [30, 31]. They circumvent the issues of the categorical
approach by focusing only on broader characteristics of emotions that can be
quantifiable such as arousal or pleasantness. Finally, a third view proposed that
emotions are defined by the way we subjectively appraise our environment along
several cognitive dimensions, also referred to as appraisal variables [32, 33].
FAtiMA is based on a combination of both the first and the third views,
the OCC theory of emotions[24], is an appraisal theory that implicitly follows
a categorical approach. Formally, an emotion is defined as a tuple with four
elements:
< type , valence , intensity , cause , target >
The type of the emotion represents its categorical name. In total, the OCC
theory proposes 22 emotion types that are psychologically distinct. Examples
include Joy, Fear, Distress, Pride, Reproach, among others. The valence of
an emotion indicates if the emotion is positive or negative which depends on its
type. For instance, Joy is considered to be positively valenced while Distress is
viewed as negative. The intensity of an emotion is a number greater than
zero that indicates how strongly is the agent experiencing the emotion. As times
goes on, this value becomes smaller until it finally reaches zero and the emotion
is removed from the emotional state. Finally, the cause corresponds to the
event that triggered the emotion and the target is the name of the agent or
object that the emotion is directed at.
9

One advantage that FAtiMA has in using a categorical approach to emotions, in comparison to a dimensional model, is that it is possible for agents to
experience multiple emotions at the same time with different intensities. For
example, the agent might experience Distress after losing its queen on a chess
game while simultaneously feel Admiration for its opponent for doing a very
good play. Another advantage is that it is also possible to specify different
thresholds and decay rates for different emotion types. This can be used to
simulate certain personality traits through the agent’s emotional biases. For
instance, using the previous example, an agent that is meant to be perceived as
highly competitive in the chess example should be set with a lower threshold
for Distress and a higher threshold for Admiration.
Besides the list of active emotions, the emotional state also implements the
Mood ([ agent ]) meta-belief that was previously mentioned. The concept of
mood is an affective state that is more broad in the sense that it is not typically
provoked by a specific event. Similar to emotions, mood is also characterized
by a positive or negative valence but its duration is longer. Based on these
notions, mood is represented in FAtiMA as a meta-belief whose value ranges
from -10 to 10. This value is updated each time a new emotion is added. In the
case of positive emotions, the mood value will increase based on the emotion’s
intensity. Conversely, negative emotions decrease the mood of the agent, also
based on their intensity.
3.5. Emotional Appraisal
The purpose of the Emotional Appraisal library is to generate new emotions
by doing a subjective assessment of the events received as input. The notion
that emotions should be generated in this manner stems from the ideas put
forward by appraisal theories of emotion [34]. On a broad sense, these theories
propose that the reason why people have different emotional responses when
facing the same situation is because they conceptualize it in a different manner.
More specifically, people will make a series of judgments about a situation and
the result of those judgments will determine the emotional response.
The appraisal model that is implemented inside the Emotional Appraisal
library uses appraisal rules to simulate the aforementioned psychological process
of judging events. Formally, an appraisal rule has the following components:
< event , target , appVariables , conditions >
The parameter event is a well-formed name that is used to match the
name of the events received. The target is the name of the agent or object
that the rule applies to. The third element, named appVariables, consists
of a list of appraisal variables and their respective numerical values. Finally,
conditions is a list of logical conditions that need to be verified according
to the agent’s beliefs in order for the rule to be activated.
For the purpose of illustrating how the specified algorithm uses these rules
to generate emotions consider the following simple example:
Event: Event ( Action - End ,[ x ] , Smile , SELF )
10

Target: SELF
AppVariables:
Desirability = [ d ]
Conditions:
RapportLevel ( SELF , [ x ]) = [ d ]
Considering this rule, what would happen when an agent, named Sam, perceives the agent John smiling, which is represented as Event ( Action - End
, Sam , Smile , John )? Firstly, the algorithm tries to unify the rule’s event
with the event name. In this case, the unification is possible with the following substitution set {[ x ]/ John}. It is important to mention that SELF is a
special symbol that can be used in a rule and is always replaced by the name
of the agent, in this case Sam. Because at least one substitution set was found,
the next step is to unify the rules’ conditions with the agents’ beliefs taking
into account the already existing substitutions from the previous step. If we
assume that agent Sam believes RapportLevel ( Sam , John ) = 5, then
the rule’s conditions are made true by applying the following substitutions:
{[ x ]/ John , [ d ]/5}. The final step is now to generate an emotion based
on the type and value of the appraisal variables specified in the rule. Following
the OCC theory[24], a positive desirability results in the generation of a Joy
emotion whose intensity is linearly proportional to the desirability value. Assuming this intensity is higher than Sam’s threshold value of Joy, the emotion
is added to the Emotional State and becomes active until it intensity decays
below a minimum value.
The appraisal process, specifically, is defined by two main steps, the Appraisal Derivation and the Affect Derivation. The first, Appraisal Derivation,
determines what appraisal variables are affected by the event and their value.
The second, Affect Derivation, computes what emotions are being triggered by
those variables, their intensity and the resulting mood which in turn will affect
the agent’s emotional state.
Authors have full control of the first process, the Appraisal Derivation, by
defining Appraisal Rules and their components’ values. The second process, the
Affect Derivation, is internally computed by the framework and, as we mentioned, follows the model proposed by Ortony, Clore, and Collins [24]. In order
to support the full range of OCC emotions, FAtiMA uses 5 different appraisal
variables:
• Desirability: Are the consequences of an event desirable for me?
• Desirability for others: Are the consequences of an event desirable for
other(s)? Combined with the “Desirability” appraisal variable describes
emotions related to the Fortune of others and how desired that fortune is
for the agent.
• Praiseworthiness: Is the action praiseworthy within the agent’s social
norms?
• Goal Probability: How far is the agent from a reaching particular goal?
11

• Like: Is the action/object/agent appealing?
The relation between these variables, their valence, and how each emotion
is computed is briefly described in the OCC Model. During the implementation
of those descriptions we’ve took some liberties as there was no exact equation
on how, for instance, the intensity is calculated. Nevertheless FAtiMA is able
to generate all 22 different emotions described in the OCC Model of Emotions.
We can group these by the motivation behind them:
• Well-Being emotions: “Joy” and “Distress”, described by the Desirability
appraisal variable alone.
• Fortune of others emotions: “Happy-for”, “Gloating”, “Resentment” and
“Pity”, are described by the combination of both Desirability and Desirability for others appraisal variables. Represent the consequences of an
event towards others and how desirable that fortune is for the agent.
• Attribution emotions: “Pride”, “Shame”, “Admiration” and “Reproach”,
described by Praiseworthiness alone, the main difference between them
comes from the agent’s responsibility. If the appraised action was performed others then it can lead to either “Admiration or Reproach” otherwise, if the agent was the “executioner” it can lead to “Pride” or “Shame”,
depending on its valence.
• Attraction emotions: “Love” and “Hate” are solely described by the Like
appraisal variable. Describe the overall attractiveness of an object/event/action.
• Compound Emotions: “Gratification”, “Remorse”, “Gratitude” and “Anger”,
are the result of the combination between Desirability and Praiseworthiness appraisal variables.
• Prospect Based emotions: “Hope”, “Fear”, “Satisfaction”, “Fears-confirmed”,
“Relief” and “Disappointment” are all related to events that contribute towards a possible future outcome, either positive or negative for the agent.
Essentially they are described by the agent’s Goals and how these evolve
when an event is appraised.
Goals and Goal Success Probability
One of the main differences between the OCC Model and FAtiMA is how the
framework handles prospect-based emotions and their relation with the agent’s
Goals. Here, we make two assumptions. First, we consider that all goals are
something the agent wants to attain, as such they should all be “positively
oriented”. For example, instead of having a “don’t die” goal authors should use
“the agent wants to survive”.
The other assumption that we make is that the if the goal reaches extreme
values, 0 or 1, they have reached a “confirmed” status. If the likelihood of a goal
is 0 then it has failed. If the likelihood of a goal is 1 then it has been achieved.
Goals are defined by the following tuple:
12

< goal , significance , likelihood >
The name serves to both identify and describe what is represents. The
significance value describes how important the goal is to the agent, ranging 0
to 10. Finally, the likelihood parameter is the starting probability of the goal,
as we mentioned before, ranges from 0 to 1.
Prospect-based emotions are directly related to the evolution of the likelihood of each Goal. Goals-Confirmed emotions, Satisfaction and Fears-confirmed
are only triggered if the Goal has reached either 1 or 0, respectively. The remaining 4 emotions are based on the expectation of the agent and if there was
a major shift in the likelihood of reaching a goal. For example, if a goal such as
“Survive” had a low likelihood of happening and, all of the sudden, its probability increases a lot then the agent feels Relief.
Previous Likelihood
0.2
0.2
0.8
0.8
0.2
0.8

Current Likelihood
0.5
0.8
0.5
0.2
0
1

Resulting Emotion
Hope
Relief
Fear
Disappointment
Fears-Confirmed
Satisfaction

It is important to note that all “unconfirmed” Prospect-emotions can be
generated even if the goal is confirmed. For example, if the agent was expecting a
goal to be achieved and it fails it will generate both emotions: “Disappointment”
and “Fears-Confirmed”, however, the latter will have more intensity.
The process just described is also used to model the emotional state of
other agents in the following manner. After the emotional state of the agent
is updated based on the event perceived, the Role Play Character component
makes subsequent requests to the Emotional Appraisal component to appraise
the same event but from the perspective of the other agents. As a starting
point, the agent assumes that all other agents have the same appraisal rules but
the unification algorithm unifies the logical conditions of those rules using the
beliefs it has of those agents’ perspective and the keyword SELF corresponds to
the name of the other agents instead. The resulting emotions are added to an
identical emotional state structure which is created for each other agent that is
present in the environment.
3.6. Emotional Decision Making
As previously mentioned, the purpose of the Emotional Decision Making is
to deliberate on the action that the agent should perform next. This is done
by checking the list of the specified decision rules, which have the following
attributes:
< action , target , conditions , priority , layer >

13

The attribute action is a well-formed name that can be either a symbol
(e.g. Smile, Eat) or a composed name (e.g. Offer(Gift)) in which the inner
symbols are treated as the action’s parameters. The target of the action is
the name of the agent or object that the action is aimed at. The parameter
conditions is a list of logical conditions used to check if the action can be
executed. The priority is a numerical value that represents how important
it is for the agent to execute the action. Finally, the layer parameter is a
symbol that indicates in which layer is the action considered in the decisionmaking process. It allows the agent to consider different groups of actions at
different time scales. Typically, there is a need for at least two layers when
it comes to decision-making, one that is reactive and allows for fast decisions
and another that is slower and focused on more strategic decisions. Note that
the combination of these two layers is usually referred to as an hybrid agent
architecture [35].
When describing the Role Play Character and the notion of meta-beliefs we
already used some examples of decision rules and how they work concerning
the logical unification process. As such, we will now focus on the purpose
of the last two attributes of a decision rule, namely priority and layer.
Typically, there will be multiple decision rules in the chosen configuration of
the Emotional Decision Making component. Even if there is a single decision
rule, it can generate multiple actions as a result of finding more than one set
of valid substitutions. In that case, the agent needs to deliberate on which
concrete action should it execute. This is what the priority of the decision
rule is used for. More precisely, the Emotional Decision Making will return the
list of all actions found ordered based on their priority score, from highest
to lowest. Note that the value of priority can be a logical variable that
is determined by using both regular and meta-beliefs, similar to the appraisal
variables in an appraisal rule. If that is the case, a numerical substitution must
be found in the rule’s conditions or the action is not selected. Alternatively,
the value of priority can also be defined as a constant value. Finally, the
priority score of a decision rule is affected negatively if the substitution set
contains uncertain beliefs. This is done by multiplying the priority score with
the certainty value of the beliefs that were used in the rule’s substitutions.
One of the typical challenges associated with creating a decision-making solution for a virtual agent or a robot is being able to handle real-time interaction.
This means that some of the agent’s decisions must be made rather quickly in
response to what is happening in the environment and what the other agents
are doing. The purpose of the layer attribute is to solve this issue. Essentially, this attribute is used to group decision rules by their complexity and
purpose. For instance, decision rules related to facial expressions can be labeled
as ‘Expressive’ whereas rules to decide upon which move to play in a given game
can be labeled as ‘Deliberative’. Then, when making a decision request, it is
possible to specify a specific layer as a parameter and the algorithm will only
process decision rules of that layer. Without this mechanism, every decision
rule would have to be analysed at each request, which would quickly become
too inefficient for handling real-time interaction.
14

4. An accessible Intelligent Agent’s Toolkit
FAtiMA Toolkit was specifically developed with the intent of making agentbased solutions more accessible and reliable for its users. Taking this into account we worked with several different authors, developers and students in order
to identify the main problems when using this type of framework. In this section we will describe these issues and how we addressed them, we hope that our
approach and solutions can serve as a guideline to other researchers that are
developing similar systems.
4.1. Library based design
Many agent-based tools are developed by adopting a framework paradigm.
More precisely, they define a rigid monolithic structure that acts as the skeleton
of the whole system. For instance, in the case of FAtiMA Modular, the architecture dictates a core algorithm that implements the perception-action cycle of
an agent. Within this core algorithm it is possible to add or remove components
of different types. Due to this problem, the design of the core algorithm is faced
with the highly difficult challenge of having to be generic enough to encompass
all possible forms of a perception-action cycle in an agent.
Another very important issue in the use of a framework paradigm is that,
generally speaking, frameworks are hard to combine together due to their nature.
Because of this issue, the risk in adopting a particular framework for a given
project is substantially higher. In the context of the RAGE Project where we
got to work with several different developers and received feedback from people
within the industry we feel that this type of concern is quite important, specially
in a large project. Additionally it plays also a major role in explaining why, for
instance, only a small number of game engines are actually used in the video
game industry and many companies still decide to develop an in-house solution.
During the development of FAtiMA Toolkit we transitioned from a framework paradigm to a library based approach. Library based design means that
the components work as individual libraries that can be used on their own.
From a software standpoint this equates to while having a complex and robust
architecture, the pieces that make part of it can function independently and can
be picked apart to be used in another puzzle.
In the FAtiMA Toolkit context is means that, if developers are only interested in having a solution to generate emotions they are able to use the
Emotional Appraisal library in isolation. If a developer is only interested in
having a character that has an Autobiographic Memory then it can simply use
the Role Play Character library alone.
As we’ve mentioned, the components can be used autonomously, however
they work best together. The configuration shown in Figure 1 depicts how the
existing components are combined together to create an agent with emotions
and a complete and rich perception-action cycle.

15

4.2. Meta-beliefs
On a practical level, the notion of meta-belief was implemented in the following manner. Similar to a regular belief, its syntactic structure is a composed
name with a root symbol and a sequence of literals within parenthesis that are
separated by commas. The difference is that meta-beliefs are registered in the
Knowledge Base as procedures with their name becoming a reserved keyword.
As such, the unification algorithm is able to identify them when parsing the
composed names within a logical condition. Whenever it encounters a metabelief it will dynamically execute its associated code to retrieve its value. The
code can be either very simple or quite complex, depending on the nature of
the meta-belief itself. For example, one of the meta-beliefs that the Role Play
Character adds is Mood ([ a ]), which simply retrieves the mood value of agent
[a]. Comparatively, the meta-beliefs added by the Social Importance and the
CiF-CK modules are more complex. These two modules are labeled as Reasoners in Figure 1 precisely because their main purpose is to augment the reasoning
capabilities of the agent’s decision-making and appraisal through the addition
of meta-beliefs. The “(...)” displayed in the diagram is to indicate that external
developers can also extend the toolkit by adding additional reasoner modules
with their own set of meta-beliefs without changing the toolkit’s source code.
Going back to the chess example, one possibility would be to add a chess engine
as a reasoner module that would add the meta-belief “BestChessMove([boardid],[player-color],[depth])”. That meta-belief could then be used in a decision
rule like this:
Action: PlayChess
Target: [ m ]
Priority: 1
Conditions:
Playing ( Chess ) = [ id ]
PlayerColor ( SELF , Chess ) = [ c ]
BestChessMove ([ id ] ,[ c ] , Mood ( SELF ) ) =[ m ]
As this example illustrates, one of the advantages of meta-beliefs is that they
can be used inside logical conditions in an identical manner as regular beliefs.
Moreover, they can be nested inside each other. The nesting is possible because
each meta-belief has full access to the contents of the Knowledge Base, which
includes both regular and other meta-beliefs. In this particular case, Mood (
SELF ) is nested inside BestChessMove with the aim of making the [depth]
parameter of the chess search depend on the agent’s current mood. The result
would be that the agent, similar to a human, would come up with better moves
in the game if it was in a good mood. To summarize, the key contribution of
meta-beliefs, as defined in this manner, is that they allow for multiple reasoning
and affective processes to be interwoven together under a unified rule-based
system. We will now discuss in further detail some of the components that have
previously been mentioned.

16

4.3. Reasoner Components
As stated previously, the role of reasoner components is to augment the capabilities of the Emotional Appraisal and the Emotional Decision Making by
adding meta-beliefs that can be used in logical conditions. Therefore, their use
is optional, which is important as they may require additional authorial effort.
With that said, the two reasoners that are shown in Figure 1 work in conjunction
to augment the ability of the agent to perceive and act appropriately in different
socio-cultural contexts. More precisely, the first one, named Social Importance
was originally added to FAtiMA in order to be able to create groups of agents
that would act and feel according to different cultural values [36]. The second
one, named CiF-CK is based on a model [37] that was used to add social behaviour to Non-Player Characters in the popular game Skyrim[38]. The model
is an adaption of the “Comme il Faut” architecture [39].

Social Importance
This component adds the meta-belief SI ([ target ]), which calculates
the amount of social importance (SI) the [ target ] agent has in the agent’s
perspective. This is a numerical value, ranging from 1 to 100, that signifies
the extent to which the agent is willing to act in the interest of the [ target
] agent. The concept is based on a sociological theory of human motivation
that conceptualizes human action in accordance to two fundamental relational
dimensions: status and power [40]. According to this theory, we are motivated
to confer status to those who deserve it and refrain from claiming more status
than what we perceive to have in the eyes of others. The amount claimed
and conferred by each action depends a great deal on cultural conventions but
generally, the higher the request, the more status it claims. For a FAtiMA agent,
the purpose of SI is to implement this notion of status so it can better navigate
and understand different relational contexts. For instance, a stranger asking a
personal question is inappropriate but not a friend. This is because, all else
being equal, the SI of a friend should be higher than the SI of a stranger. These
conventions are implemented in the component as attribution rules, which are
defined as the following tuple:
< target , conditions , siValue >
These rules work in a similar manner to the appraisal and decision rules described previously. Essentially, the unification algorithm will process each rule
individually and try to find valid substitutions for the rule’s conditions. If so,
the siValue defined in the rule is added to the target’s total SI. Note that
these rules can refer to beliefs about properties of other agents, such as whether
or not they are a family member, or they can refer to their past actions in the
environment, such as the amount of times they were rude towards the agent for
example. Also, by using the meta-belief ToM ([ target ] , SI ( SELF ) ) the
agent is also capable of inferring how much SI it has in the perspective of the
target agent. This is done by using the beliefs associated to the target

17

agent perspective when going through the attribution rules.

CiF-CK
In most scenarios that are focused on social interaction it is likely there
will be various social conventions that agents should follow such as introducing
themselves in the beginning of a conversation or saying goodbye at the end.
The purpose of the CiF-CK component is precisely to make agents aware of this
existing social exchanges as well as capable of executing them appropriately. The
main motivation is to be able to automatically add a layer of social behaviour
that can be reused across several domains.
The primary knowledge structure of CiF-CK are Social Exchanges. These
are meant to represent an established sequence of interaction steps between two
agents. Formally, they are defined as the following tuple:
< name , target , steps , conditions >
The parameter name is used to identify the type of social exchange (e.g.
Flirt, Greet) and target is the name of the agent with whom the social exchange is to be performed with. The parameter steps is a list of symbols that
represents the sequence of actions that both agents perform in a back and forth
manner (e.g. {Initiate , Answer , Finalize}). Finally, conditions
are logical conditions that can be of two types: (1) starting - conditions
and (2) mode - conditions. The first type is used to define when a Social
Exchange can start whereas conditions of the second type are used to compute
the desire an agent has to perform a specific social exchange in a certain mode.
As such, each mode - condition has the name of the mode it refers to (e.g.
Positive, Negative, Sarcastic) and it also has a value associated with it. The
desire for the agent to perform a step of the social exchange using a particular
mode is given by the sum of the values of all its mode - conditions that are
verified.
The social exchanges that are defined in the CiF-CK component can be
used in decision rules through the following meta-belief: SE ([ se - name ] ,[
target ] ,[ step ] ,[ mode ]). This meta-belief will automatically find valid
substitutions for the defined variables and return a numerical value representing
the desire of the agent to perform a specific step of a social exchange in a
certain mode. For example, the value of SE ( Flirt , John , Initiate ,
Sarcastic ) is determined by first checking if the starting conditions of the
“Flirt” social exchange are verified and the current step in the execution order
is “Initiate”. If all this applies, the algorithm then sums and returns the value
of all the “Sarcastic” conditions that are verified. The returned value can then
be directly linked to the priority of the decision rule that uses this meta-belief.
Note that there is a synergy between the CiF-CK and Social Importance
component as it is possible to use conditions based on SI in the conditions of a
social exchange. On the following section, we will now explain how a decision
that involves dialogue such as the previous example of flirting is handled by the
toolkit.
18

5. Explicit Dialogue Structure
As previously mentioned, the first use case of FAtiMA was to drive the behaviour of non-player characters in FearNot!, a serious game about bullying.
Rather than offering a linear story for the player to experience, the game chose
to use an educational role-play approach, in which the story emerges from the
interactions of characters playing their designated role (e.g. bully, victim, victim’s friend, etc.). Like the player, each autonomous agent is controlling their
designated character according to their own knowledge and perspective about
the world and the other characters. Given that the dialogue in the story emerges
from the individual decisions of the different agents, this approach to interactive storytelling is commonly referred to as being distributed or character-centric
[41]. Alternatively, the other common approach for designing an interactive storytelling system is the centralized or plan-based approach. In it there is a central
AI component, typically referred to as a drama manager. This component is in
charge of planning and directing all the dialogue actions that are made by each
character and then adapting the story plan in accordance to how the player acts.
The game Façade [42] is a well-known interactive drama where this approach
was used with success. There are both upsides and downsides in each approach.
On one hand, the central planning approach provides a greater deal of control
and predictability to the author but its rigidness makes it difficult to scale up.
On the other hand, the distributed approach allows for much more flexibility in
the way characters respond but loses in terms of predictability of the outcome,
which also makes it hard to scale up when trying to assure a particular authorial
or educational goal from the narrative.
Neither of the two approaches mentioned have been largely adopted in the
video games industry so far due to its more risk-aversive nature. For the most
part, developer studios still rely heavily on building scripted cut scenes mixed
with multiple-choice options for the player. This usually leads to a branching
narrative format. Consequentially, most game developers become accustomed
to creating and managing dialogue trees, preferring to find ways by which their
practical limitations can be compensated rather than switching to a distributed
or centralized planning approach. Motivated by this preference, most commercial tools for building dialogue systems for video games also use dialogue trees
as their principal component.
Because dialogues trees are so prevalent in game development, we decided
to incorporate them in FAtiMA Toolkit but maintaining a character-centric
paradigm. This lead to a hybrid solution that is meant to be more familiar to
a game developer while still maintaining the flexibility and richness of having
multiple autonomous agents controlling the dialogues of their characters. To
explain how the proposed dialogue system works consider the tree structure
shown in Figure 2. The same structure could be represented in the following
tabular format:

19

Figure 2: Simple dialog tree structure with each circle representing a dialogue state and each
arrow a dialogue action.

Id
d1
d2
d3
d4

Current State
s1
s1
s2
s3

Next State
s2
s3
s4
s4

Utterance
What are you doing?
How are you feeling?
Nothing special.
I am feeling great.

Creating this simple dialogue between a player and a character would be
quite straightforward in a system that is based on dialog trees. However, if
one were to use an approach based on autonomous agents then the tree itself
would no longer be explicitly represented anywhere. Instead, it would have to
be implicitly defined in the agents’ goals, beliefs, internal state, and actions. As
such, to achieve the same effect, the author would have to configure an agent
whose cognitive decisions would lead it to perform the dialogue action d3 after
the player performed d1 and d4 after the player performed d2.
For such a simple dialogue, the agent-based solution is less practical. However, dialogues are usually quite less constrained than the example given. As
one may notice, both in s1 and in s2 there is only one possible response for
the character to select. As such, there is no need for a decision-making process.
But what if we want to add multiple possible replies for the character to select
from? For instance, consider that in state s3 we would like to have the following
additional dialogue, to be said when the character is in a negative mood:
Id
d5

Current State
s3

Next State
s4

Utterance
None of your business.

In a system with dialogue trees, adding this dialogue for a character requires
the existence of a conditional mechanism that will select it in the right context.
In this case, an example would be a rule associated to s3 that would check
the mood of the character and select d5 in case it was negative and d4 if it
was positive. The scalability issue of this solution becomes apparent when we
20

want a range of characters that exhibit diverse dialogue strategies in the same
contexts. At this point, the rules encoded in each state must account for all the
desirable character variations. This is the point where an agent-based solution
becomes more valuable as each agent will have its own separate logic to select
dialogue actions. However, due to this separation it becomes difficult to grasp
how the narrative flows.
The solution adopted in FAtiMA Toolkit was to have an explicit dialogue tree
structure but with a crucial distinction. The representation of the tree structure
does not contain any logic that decides what the characters say. Instead, it
merely informs agents controlling characters of how many options they can
choose from in a given dialogue state. Essentially, it is as if the agents were
other human players that can select freely among a finite set of dialogue options.
In order for the agents to reason about their choice, dialogue options can be
associated to different semantic tags pertaining to the meaning and the style of
the utterance.
This information is accessible in the reasoning process of the agent through
the following meta-belief:
ValidDialogue ([ cs ] ,[ ns ] ,[ m ] ,[ s ])
This meta-belief will go through the list of defined dialogues and will build
a set of substitutions for each dialogue that it finds, also taking into account
any existing constraints from previous conditions. The four different arguments
are: [cs] - current state, [ns] - next state, [m] - meaning, [s] - style. For every
substitution found, the value returned is ‘True’. To demonstrate the usefulness
of this meta-belief consider the following decision rule for a ‘Speak’ action:
Action: Speak ([ cs ] ,[ ns ] ,[ m ] ,[ s ])
Target: [ x ]
Priority: 1
Conditions:
DialogueState ([ x ]) = [ cs ]
ValidDialogue ([ cs ] ,[ ns ] ,[ m ] ,[ s ]) = True
This single decision rule is capable of handling any basic dialogue tree like
the one shown in Figure 2 where the characters’ dialogues are determined just by
the current state of the conversation. Additionally, for the character to choose
to speak using a ‘Rude’ style when its mood is negative, adding the following
decision rule with a higher priority would be sufficient:
Action: Speak ([ cs ] ,[ ns ] ,[ m ] , Rude )
Target: [ x ]
Priority: 2
Conditions:
DialogueState ([ x ]) = [ cs ]
ValidDialogue ([ cs ] ,[ ns ] ,[ m ] , Rude ) = True
Mood ( SELF ) < 0
The purpose of these examples is to demonstrate that, ultimately, the decisions are still being made autonomously according to the logic of each agent.
21

As such, the flexibility that comes with an agent-based solution is not sacrificed. Instead, this flexibility is combined with a centralized representation of
the possible dialogues, which is the paradigm that most game developers are
already accustomed to. As a result, it becomes much less cumbersome for them
to adopt this agent-based solution, even for scenarios with a simple dialogue
structure. This centralized perspective for the definition of dialogues, meaning
that they are not restricted in the mind of a single agent, is also aligned with
the idea that dialogues are often social practices, of common knowledge, that
can be used by different agents in similar situations.
6. Integrated Authoring Tool
The accessibility of an agent-based framework like FAtiMA Toolkit is determined in large part by its authoring experience. Ideally, a person would be
able to come up with different ideas for how a character behaves in one or more
contexts and then easily configure different FAtiMA agents that would match
those ideas without having to write code.
With the previous goal in mind, FAtiMA Toolkit provides an integrated
authoring tool that supports the creation and configuration of scenarios by noncoders. As shown in Figure 3 this is a GUI tool with a hierarchical structure
that contains several editors, a simulator and a Web API. At the top, there
is a main editor where general aspects of the scenario are configured. These
include the scenario’s name, a short description and a list of character profiles.
On the second level of the hierarchy, there are six different editors with their
own specific purpose.

Figure 3: Integrated Authoring Tool - Diagram of existing components

The purpose of the Dialogue Editor is to define all the dialogue actions that
will be available for the agents and the players to select from. Additionally,
22

there is also the possibility to export and import dialogues from other formats,
including MS Excel. The Dialogue Editor also provides a validation mechanism
that runs a depth-first search through all the dialogue states and tells the author
which states are not reachable and how many end states exist. This information
is used to quickly detect any possible errors in state transitions. Finally it is
also possible to create and view a State Machine Graph of all possible dialogues
and their corresponding states and transitions.
The Character Editor is where the author configures the different agent profiles that are part of the scenario. For each agent, the author is able to specify
their initial emotional state, the initial beliefs of their knowledge base, the previous events the agent will be able to recall in their autobiographic memory and
the agent’s goals. Each of these components has their own interface.
The Cognitive Rules section is responsible for configuring different cognitive
components of the agents. In the Emotional Appraisal Editor, the author defines
all the appraisal rules and parameters that drive the generation process of emotions. In the Emotional Decision Making Editor, the author specifies the rules
that will guide the decision-making process of the agent. In the Social Importance Editor, the author specifies the rules that will tell the agent how it should
perceive and act towards others from a relational perspective. Finally, in the
CiF-CK Editor, the author can specify different patterns of micro-interactions
that are common in human interaction such as a greeting or giving a compliment.
To help the authoring process, the author is capable of defining what are the
consequences of an agent performing a specific action in the World Editor. For
instance, the author can specify that after each dialogue action the property
“Has(Floor)” will assume the value corresponding to the name of the agent to
whom the speak action was directed. This is particularly relevant in a multiparty conversation with multiple agents talking to one another. An additional
rule could then be added that after a certain amount of time has passed if
the agent who has the floor remains silent then the property “Has(Floor)” will
assume the name of another random agent.
It is important to note that the effects of actions might be programmed
directly in the game itself and communicated to the agents via events. The
main benefit of using the World Editor is that these effects are configurable
without having to recompile the game. Also, the action effects defined in the
World Editor will be visible to the Simulator.
The Simulator component allows the author to quickly run and test the
defined scenario. As such, it becomes easier for the author to be able to do
iterative testing and to reuse previous configurations from other scenarios and
adapt them accordingly. Testers can play the role of any of the loaded characters
or just become a spectator as the scenario unfolds. Additionally it also features
several debug tools such as a real-time agent inspector capable of querying the
agent’s Knowledge Base, display their Emotional State, its Memory and Goals
along with showing information regarding which rules are being triggered and
its consequent effects.
FAtiMA Toolkit’s Web API module is our most recent component. Web
23

APIs are a set of rules for interacting with a server with the most common use
case being data retrieval. Essentially, it allows users to run a server on their own
machine and through GET and POST functions interact with FAtiMA and its
engine. The major benefit of Web APIs is, because they are built around HTTP
protocols, nearly any programming language can be used to access them. As a
result, FAtiMA is now able to be used by a wide array of different technologies
and engines. For example, the video game Don’t Starve Together is built on a
custom C++ engine, however, most of the gameplay is written in LUA [43]. This
programming language supports HTTP communication, as such, it is possible to
write a Mod for the game that communicates with FAtiMA and transforms the
agent’s decision rules within FAtiMA Toolkit into actions in the game. Fabio et
al. did just that, they built a bridge between FAtiMA Toolkit and Don’t Stave
Together where authors can write decision and appraisal rules for an agent and
watch the result of that authoring within the game, either cooperating with the
agent or by simply watching as the action unfolds [44]. We will further describe
this particular Use Case in Section 7.
One final consideration about the accessibility of the authoring process is
that all of the configuration files are stored in a JSON format that is easy to
read and change using a text editor.
7. Use Cases
To illustrate the potential and versatility of FAtiMA Toolkit, we will now
present several different recent case studies where it has been successfully applied. We will start by enumerating each in the following Table and proceed to
describe each more in-depth within the following sections.
Name
Space Modules
Sports Team Manager
FAtiMA Virtual Reality
Demo - Police Interrogation
FAtiMA’s Game Jam
Don’t Starve Together
Game AI Course
Sueca Card Game With
Robotic Partners

Project
RAGE Project
RAGE Project

Publication
[45, 46, 47]
[45, 46, 47]

URL

RAGE Project

-

7

RAGE Project
Master Thesis
University of Lisbon

[46]
[44]
[46]

8

AMIGOS Project

[48]

11

5 https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.PlayGen.SpaceModulesInc
6 http://playgen.com/play/sport-team-manager/
7 https://fatima-toolkit.eu/showcase/
8 https://itch.io/jam/fatima-jam
9 https://fatima-toolkit.eu/fatima-toolkit-mcts-and-dont-starve-together/
10 https://fenix.tecnico.ulisboa.pt/cursos/meic-t/disciplina-curricular/845953938489420

24

5
6

9
10

7.1. Space Modules Inc.

Figure 4: SpaceModules - Conversation screen (left); Score screen (right)

Space Modules Inc (see Fig 4) is a serious game that was developed in
the RAGE project by the company PlayGen12 for an educational organization
in the Netherlands named Stichting Praktijkleren13 . In total, the game will
be used and evaluated across 6 participating schools with a total number of
students around 1100. It is a single player game where the player must provide
customer service on behalf of a spaceship part manufacturer. He or she does
this by engaging in dialogue with different NPC customers that call the player
to solve a problem they are having with their spaceship. The challenge lies
in the fact that each customer has a unique emotional profile. For instance,
some customers get angrier more quickly whereas other get angrier if you do
not solve their problem promptly. The score that is attributed to the player is
derived from the emotional state of the character at the end of the conversation.
Therefore, players must learn how to manage the emotions of their customers
in addition to providing the right solutions to their problems. Concerning the
interaction, a limited amount of dialog choices is given to the player at each
turn until the conversation ends and a new customer call arrives. During the
conversation, the NPC provides nonverbal feedback that is indicative of its
current emotional state. It is up to player to pay close attention to these signals
and the conversation unfolds.
It is important to highlight that the integration of FAtiMA Toolkit in the
code of Space Modules Inc. was handled directly by the game developers at
PlayGen. By following an available example they were able to use the toolkit
11 https://gaips.inesc-id.pt/amigos/
12 http://playgen.com/
13 http://stichtingpraktijkleren.nl/

25

to drive the emotional dynamics of the characters as well as their responses.
Moreover, the pedagogical experts were able to code the many dialogues that
occur within the game using the explicit dialogue structure that was described in
section 5. This was achieved by first defining a list of symbols that would be used
to categorize the meaning and the style of the different dialogue alternatives. We
then configured a small set of appraisal and decision rules that were sensitive to
those symbols and to the game’s pedagogical goals. After this was complete, the
pedagogical experts were then able to use the provided authoring tool to code
all the dialogues of the game taking into account the several different spaceship
devices and their associated problems. This is a very encouraging result for the
accessibility of the toolkit given that our involvement in the authorial process
of previous serious games that used FAtiMA was much higher.
7.2. Sports Team Manager
Sports Team Manager is another game developed by Playgen during the
RAGE project that makes use of FAtiMA Toolkit. Here, the objective is to
assemble the most optimally performing sailing team by resolving conflicts and
managing the team’s interactions.
In order to better identify the character’s skills and personalities, players
must interview each member. The team has a set of predetermined roles, each
with overlapping skill requirements [45]. Additionally players must take into
account the team’s morale and work on the social relationships within the team.
Each customer/sailor can have a different emotional profiles, thus providing a
different challenges and conflict situations, which the player must solve, will
arise seamlessly.
Just as it happened during the development of Space Modules Inc, the integration of FAtiMA with the game engine was handled directly by the developers. FAtiMA is responsible for managing the agent’s beliefs, reactions and
their actions. In this case, the beliefs are related to information such as their
last position in the team, skill ratings, opinion ratings and event states. Sports
Team Manager is also able to take full advantage of the Autobiographic Memory
component of FAtiMA. Because each of the players decisions is saved into the
characters memory, a history of events can be preserved. As such, it can be also
be reloaded in further play sessions, allowing for the possibility of a persistent
game emotional state and decision making. Figure 5 shows an in-game screenshot of Sports Team Manager when a Player is talking directly to a particular
character.
7.3. FAtiMA Virtual Reality Demo - Police Interrogation
During the final years of the RAGE Project we had the opportunity of developing a Virtual Reality experience that makes full use of FAtiMA Toolkit’s
abilities. It also makes use of other RAGE-developed assets, such as L2F’s

26

Figure 5: Sports Team Manager - Conversation screen

“Speech I/O” 14 and Behaviour Mark-up Language (BML) Realizer 15 , showing players ,developers and other stakeholders, the synergy between the tools
developed throughout the project.
The demo is set in an interrogation room where users play the part of a
Police Interrogator and interact with a Suspect, that is a Role Play Character.
The player’s objective is to obtain the most information about the suspect they
can without losing control of the conversation. In order to interact with the
subject, players can select questions from a wide array of possible choices that
are displayed in a virtual computer screen as seen in Figure . After selecting
a question the virtual suspect will answer to it, using Text to Speech, according to its mood and its emotions. The questions are sorted through various
different topics such as “Marriage”, “Children”, “Work” among others. These
questions and answers are managed through the Integrated Authoring Tool Asset’s Dialogue Manager. This experience, also called FAtiMA VR Demo, was
developed using the Unity Game Engine and is compatible with most Virtual
Reality headsets. Figure 6 shows the Player perspective within the game. The
screen shown on the left is where the Players can take a look and select one of
the possible questions to be asked to the Virtual Suspect.
14 https://www.gamecomponents.eu/content/226/speechio
15 https://www.gamecomponents.eu/content/231/bml-realizer

27

Figure 6: FAtiMA Virtual Reality Demo

7.4. FAtiMA’s Game Jam
To promote the use of FAtiMA Toolkit an online “hackathon” was created
where participants were encouraged to create video games with engaging characters powered by the FAtiMA Toolkit. The hackathon was hosted on the website
itch.io 16 and lasted around 2 months.
The winner was a game called “The Princess and the Shapeshifter” 17 that
was created for the competition with original art and design. The developers
took full advantage of FAtiMA’s character-driven approach to allow players to
take the role of the character’s they interacted with. Throughout the game,
players must interact with 6 different characters/agents, with different personalities and abilities and must persuade them into letting players take somethings
from them so that they can ”shape-shift” into them.
7.5. Don’t Starve Together
Don’t Starve Together is an open world survival video game where, as in any
survival video game, the objective is to surive for as long as possible [43]. These
games, typically, have several different non-playable-characters that players can
interact with during their playthrough. The few autonomous characters of Don’t
Starve Together present limited behaviour and are not subject to the same rules
as the players, in terms of survivability. The lack of AI for NPCs capable of
creating believable characters affects the player experience. This is the primary
motivation behind Almeida’s Master Thesis [44].
In order to improve the quality the agents within the game, Almeida proposed the development of a platform that enables the creation of NPCs con16 https://itch.io/jam/fatima-jam
17 https://petzi.itch.io/the-princess-and-the-shapeshifter

28

trolled by agency based models for survival games. Using FAtiMA Toolkit, as
the model for agency, and Don’t Starve Together, they’ve implemented and
published the framework with an example character, Walter. Walter can be authored using FAtiMA Toolkit and its actions are reflected within the gameplay
of a Don’t Starve Together’s session.
7.6. Game AI Course
The toolkit has been put to test in a course on Game AI at IST, University
of Lisbon, for the past 3 years by over a hundred students. During the semester,
students work on 4 different projects, the first three cover a wide range of fields
within Artificial Intelligence: Movement and Collision Avoidance, Pathfinding
and Monte Carlo Tree Search and Decision Making algorithms, correspondingly.
For the fourth and final project students are given the option to choose the topic
they want to delve into, within AI and Games. Here, they can propose their own
assignment or they can choose one of the four different options we suggest, two
of which use FAtiMA. One combines the FAtiMA’s planning capabilities with
Monte Carlo Tree Search applied to a “survival” game and the other makes full
use of the Toolkit’s ability to create interesting conversational scenarios.
FAtiMA, Monte Carlo Tree Search and Don’t Starve Together
Since Almeida’s Thesis [44], we’ve challenged Games AI students to improve
the character (Walter), create their own model and try different approaches. For
example, we’ve found that instead of creating a model with, let’s say, 30 different
decision making rules, a Monte Carlo Tree Search(MCTS) approach has better
results in terms of survivability. In this case, students designed the agent’s
action space and their own interpretation of the environment around the agent
and, using FAtiMA’s Meta-Beliefs created their ”MCTS” Algorithm within the
framework. When agents used this meta-belief it would run a MCTS Algorithm
and decide which of the available Don’t Starve Together-based actions was the
best according to their survivability goals.
In terms of results, the standard “survival” games’ metric is number of days
survived. The original “Walter” survived for 1.8 days with 19 different decision rules. 2 years later students have been able to create an agent capable of
surviving 5 days, on average.
Over the past 2 years we’ve had over 20 different students in 10 groups,
working on their own version of this project. Their results prove both the
planning capabilities of FAtiMA and its adaptability to different contexts and
environments.
FAtiMA Toolkit and Conversation Scenarios
By opting into this project, students were given the task of creating at least
two different conversation scenarios, one with a single character interacting with
the player and another with two characters engaging in conversation with the
player at the same time. While the project did not require students to work
with all of FAtiMA’s components, many of the groups choose to use most of
29

them. Many of the students started by using the Emotional Appraisal and the
Emotional Decision Making modules but, in order to enrich their scenarios they
resorted to other reasoner components. Social Importance, for instance, was
used to manage the friendship or romance between agents while the CIF-CK
component was often used to accommodate social conventions such as agents
greeting each other in the beginning of a conversation or saying goodbye at the
end. In order to debug and test their scenarios each group used the Simulator
and the Dialogue Editor quite a bit. One particularly useful and often shown in
their reports was the option to create a graph tree with the authored dialogue
states.
In order to get acquainted with the tool students, students had 1.5 hour
workshops on FAtiMA Toolkit. Additionally we also shared with the students
a version of the toolkit that is integrated with the Unity game engine and uses
components to realize the body and expression of the characters developed by
other members of the RAGE project.
Over the last 3 years we’ve had over 30 groups of students (approximately 90
different people) creating and designing conversational scenarios using FAtiMA
Toolkit for the course of AI on Games. Students were given no limitation, as
long as the non-player characters had believable emotional responses they were
free to use any kind of topic for the conversation. The result was a wide number
of all kinds of surprisingly interesting scenarios.
From a police officer pulling over the player, after-death experiences featuring
ghosts, Obama and Trump debating about building a wall, to a scenario where
players were at the gates of heaven and had to convince the gatekeeper to let
them in. In the latter case, to be successful, players had to avoid upsetting the
gatekeeper too much. Other groups opted for a more serious theme such as a
job interview or a shopping scene with a father, his son, and a shopkeeper.
7.7. Sueca Card Game With Robotic Partners
Our final case study involves the use of FAtiMA toolkit to control the decisions of social robots rather than virtual characters. There is also another
important difference. Rather than focusing exclusively on dialogue actions, the
case study revolves around a team-based card game. More precisely, two robots
play the game of Sueca with two human partners, as shown in Figure 7. This
is a Portuguese trick-taking card game that is played by four players divided in
two teams against one another.
From a research point of view, the main purpose of this game scenario was
to investigate how robots can become more effective teammates. With that
goal in mind, we decided to explore a particular type of affective phenomena
that has not yet received a lot of attention in neither virtual agents nor social
robots. The phenomena in question is group-based emotions, which is the term
that is used to describe emotions that people experience due to their sense of
membership to a given group [49]. A common scenario where these emotions
occur is when playing or watching competitive sports.
One of the interesting aspects of group-based emotions it that it combines
appraisal theories of emotion with self-categorization theories of social identity
30

Figure 7: Mixed human-robot teams playing Sueca

[50]. With this combination in mind, Goldenberg et al. [51] proposed a generative model of group-based emotions that extends the “modal model of emotion”
by Gross [52]. Based on the ideas of the model proposed by Goldenberg et.
al., the Emotional Appraisal component of FAtiMA was used to generate group
based emotions by having the robot appraising both its actions as well as the
actions of its partner as if both have the same subject, namely, their team. As
an example, the robot felt and expressed “group shame” whenever itself or its
partner performed a bad play during the game. A user study was conducted
where one of the robots in the game had group-based emotions and the other
one felt individual-based emotions instead [48]. The results show that the robot
with group-based emotions was perceived as both more likeable and more trustworthy.
From a technical perspective, the two robots are fully autonomous in their
behaviours. As detailed in [53], a Perfect Information Monte-Carlo (PIMC) algorithm was used for the robot’s ability to play the game in a proficient manner.
The algorithm was combined with FAtiMA’s appraisal mechanism so that emotions are generated based on how well the agent is doing in the game and are
expressed through both utterances and non-verbal animations. In total, about
200 utterances were created for this scenario using the explicit dialogue structure that was defined previously. As for the non-verbal expressions, these are
driven by Nutty Tracks, one of the components within the SERA ecosystem [54].
FAtiMA Toolkit’s library design allowed the Emotional Appraisal component to
be adapted to fit other frameworks and use different algortihms. Together with
its follow-up study, over 100 participants interacted with the robots through
FAtiMA designed scenarios [48] [53].
8. Conclusions
The importance of affective behaviour in characters (and agents) is widely
acknowledged, in particular, in the gaming industry and in social robotics. Emotions capture our attention and make our interaction with artificial entities more
natural and engaging. Consequentially, a lot of effort has been put into creating
31

tools that facilitate the ability for these artificial entities to be able to portray
different emotions and social behaviour with a increase degree of realism and
believability. The use of affective models based on appraisal theories has the
potential to automate the process of generating emotions for both virtual agents
and social robots in a manner that is congruent with human psychology. Their
application is particularly relevant when the social dynamics of the interaction
are not trivial. This was the case of FearNot! [2], the serious game that led to
the creation of the original FAtiMA architecture.
Despite their potential, the use of more complete affective models outside
research has still been quite limited as there are both technical and conceptual
issues that are hindering a more widespread adoption. One such issue that is
on the technical side is the typical framework approach to agent models as it
imposes limitations in how they can be applied and combined with other tools.
On the conceptual side, cognitive architectures are designed with the intention
of being able to function in many different domains. As such they need to be able
to encompass different types of algorithms for decision-making and emotional
appraisal. Finally, interaction scenarios with virtual agents and social robots
tend to be heavily focused on dialogue but it is often the case that dialogue
actions are defined as regular actions in an agent model without any further
representation.
In this paper we described how these important issues were addressed in
the development of FAtiMA Toolkit. Rather than using a framework approach,
the toolkit uses libraries that are combined together to create affective agents.
Moreover, through the use of meta-beliefs it is possible to use various specialized algorithms under a unified rule-based approach that governs both the
agent’s emotional appraisal and decision-making. The toolkit also has a unique
approach to model dialogue that uses a centralized state-based structure for
defining all the dialogue possibilities but leaving the decision logic in the agent
model. Finally, a GUI-based authoring tool is also provided to facilitate the
process of creating agent-based scenarios and testing them iteratively.
The advantages brought by the toolkit have been explored by several different users in a number of different applications. In this article we presented
a few of them. PlayGen, an UK-based game studio, used FAtiMA Toolkit in
both of their games: Space Modules Inc. and Sports Team Manager. Players
must deal with social dilemmas to accomplish their objectives and reach a better score. FAtiMA was used to manage these social interaction scenarios and to
handle each of the character’s behaviours. The FAtiMA Virtual Reality Demo
- Police Interrogation is an experience whose focus is to display the high level
of immersion a FAtiMA-modelled character could afford in a Virtual Reality
setting. We have also illustrated the results of an Online Game Jam powered
by FAtiMA and how a Master Thesis was able to implement a search algorithm
through FAtiMA in a suvival game environment. Finally we also presented the
outcomes of FAtiMA in a course on Game AI at IST, University of Lisbon,
for the past 3 years and how we used the toolkit to investigate the impact of
group-based emotions in a robotic partner.
Regarding future work, we are planning to provide additional tools to the
32

toolkit with the goal of further alleviating the authoring effort, and improving
control and verifiability of the socio-emotional behaviour of the designed characters. For instance, the hybrid dialog system design allows us to easily replace
the user’s role by an autonomous agent, which can be built from a particular user model, and then automatically test the dialog structure and decision
making rules, determining the probability of reaching each particular state or
expressing a particular behaviour. We believe this to be an important mechanism to provide game designers so that they can more easily detect potential
problems or unreachable states and have some degree of authorial control over
the interaction.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by national funds through University of
Lisbon and Instituto Superior Técnico and INESC-ID multi annual funding with
reference UIDB/50021/2020 and the EC H2020 project RAGE http://www.rageproject.eu/;
Grant agreement No 644187.
References
[1] J. Dias, S. Mascarenhas, A. Paiva, FAtiMA modular: Towards an agent
architecture with a generic appraisal framework, in: Emotion modeling,
Springer, 2014, pp. 44–56.
[2] J. Dias, A. Paiva, Feeling and reasoning: A computational model for
emotional characters, in: Portuguese Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
Springer, 2005, pp. 127–140.
[3] A. Ortony, G. L. Clore, A. Collins, The cognitive structure of emotions,
Cambridge university press, 1990.
[4] S. H. Rodrigues, S. Mascarenhas, J. Dias, A. Paiva, A process model of
empathy for virtual agents, Interacting with Computers 27 (4) (2014) 371–
391.
[5] M. Y. Lim, J. Dias, R. Aylett, A. Paiva, Creating adaptive affective
autonomous npcs, Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems 24 (2)
(2012) 287–311.
[6] S. Mascarenhas, N. Degens, A. Paiva, R. Prada, G. J. Hofstede,
A. Beulens, R. Aylett, Modeling culture in intelligent virtual agents,
Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems 30 (5) (2016) 931–962.
doi:10.1007/s10458-015-9312-6.
[7] W. L. Johnson, J. C. Lester, Face-to-face interaction with pedagogical
agents, twenty years later, International Journal of Artificial Intelligence
in Education 26 (1) (2016) 25–36.

33

[8] J. Bach, D. Dörner, R. Vuine, A novel approach to modeling emotion and
cognition in a cognitive architecture, in: Tutorial at the 7th International
Conference on Cognitive Modeling (ICCM2006), 2006.
[9] J. D. Velásquez, P. Maes, Cathexis: A computational model of emotions,
in: Proceedings of the First International Conference on Autonomous
Agents, AGENTS ’97, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1997, pp. 518–519.
doi:10.1145/267658.267808.
[10] D. Cañamero, Modeling motivations and emotions as a basis for intelligent behavior, in: Proceedings of the First International Conference on
Autonomous Agents, AGENTS ’97, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1997, pp.
148–155. doi:10.1145/267658.267688.
[11] A. Sloman, How many separately evolved emotional beasties live within
us?, in: Emotions in Humans and Artifacts, MIT Press, 2002, pp. 29–96.
[12] J. Gratch, S. Marsella, A domain-independent framework for modeling
emotion, Journal of Cognitive Systems Research 5 (4) (2004) 269–306.
[13] S. Marsella, J. Gratch, Ema: a computational model of appraisal dynamics,
in: European Meeting on Cybernetics and Systems Research, 2006.
[14] J. Gratch, S. Marsella, Modeling coping behavior in virtual humans: Dont
worry, be happy, in: Proceedings of Second International Joint Conference
on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent systems, 2003.
[15] R. Lazarus, Emotion and Adaptation, Oxford University Press, 1991.
[16] J. E. Laird, The SOAR Cognitive Architecture, The MIT Press, 2012.
[17] C. Becker-Asano, I. Wachsmuth, Affective computing with primary and
secondary emotions in a virtual human, Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems 20 (1) (2010) 32–49. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10458009-9094-9.
[18] C. Becker-Asano, Wasabi: Affect simulation for agents with believable interactivity, Ph.D. thesis, Faculty of Technology, University of Bielefeld, iOS
Press (DISKI 319) (2008).
[19] A. Hartholt, D. Traum, S. C. Marsella, A. Shapiro, G. Stratou, A. Leuski,
L.-P. Morency, J. Gratch, All Together Now: Introducing the Virtual
Human Toolkit, in: 13th International Conference on Intelligent Virtual
Agents, Edinburgh, UK, 2013.
[20] S. Scherer, S. C. Marsella, G. Stratou, Y. Xu, F. Morbini, A. Egan,
A. Rizzo, L.-P. Morency, Perception Markup Language: Towards a Standardized Representation of Perceived Nonverbal Behaviors, in: The 12th
International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents (IVA), Santa Cruz,
CA, 2012.
34

[21] J. Lee, S. C. Marsella, Nonverbal Behavior Generator for Embodied Conversational Agents, in: 6th International Conference on Intelligent Virtual
Agents, Marina del Rey, CA, 2006.
[22] S. Kopp, B. Krenn, S. Marsella, A. N. Marshall, C. Pelachaud, H. Pirker,
K. R. Thórisson, H. Vilhjálmsson, Towards a common framework for multimodal generation: The behavior markup language, in: International workshop on intelligent virtual agents, Springer, 2006, pp. 205–217.
[23] A. Popescu, J. Broekens, M. Van Someren, Gamygdala: An emotion engine
for games, IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing 5 (1) (2014) 32–44.
[24] G. L. Clore, A. Ortony, Psychological construction in the OCC model of
emotion, Emotion Review 5 (4) (2013) 335–343.
[25] J. H. Flavell, Metacognition and cognitive monitoring: A new area of
cognitive-developmental inquiry 34 (1979) 906–911.
[26] R. Sun, The clarion cognitive architecture: Extending cognitive modeling
to social simulation, Cognition and multi-agent interaction (2006) 79–99.
[27] R. Sun, The motivational and metacognitive control in clarion, Modeling
integrated cognitive systems (2007) 63–75.
[28] P. Ekman, W. V. Friesen, Constants across cultures in the face and emotion., Journal of personality and social psychology 17 (2) (1971) 124.
[29] J. A. Russell, Pancultural aspects of the human conceptual organization of
emotions., Journal of personality and social psychology 45 (6) (1983) 1281.
[30] J. A. Russell, A circumplex model of affect., Journal of personality and
social psychology 39 (6) (1980) 1161.
[31] J. A. Russell, A. Mehrabian, Evidence for a three-factor theory of emotions,
Journal of research in Personality 11 (3) (1977) 273–294.
[32] C. A. Smith, P. C. Ellsworth, Patterns of cognitive appraisal in emotion.,
Journal of personality and social psychology 48 (4) (1985) 813.
[33] M. Siemer, I. Mauss, J. J. Gross, Same situation–different emotions: how
appraisals shape our emotions., Emotion 7 (3) (2007) 592.
[34] A. Moors, P. C. Ellsworth, K. R. Scherer, N. H. Frijda, Appraisal theories
of emotion: State of the art and future development, Emotion Review 5 (2)
(2013) 119–124.
[35] C. Carrascosa, J. Bajo, V. Julián, J. M. Corchado, V. Botti, Hybrid multiagent architecture as a real-time problem-solving model, Expert Systems
with Applications 34 (1) (2008) 2–17.

35

[36] S. Mascarenhas, N. Degens, A. Paiva, R. Prada, G. J. Hofstede, A. Beulens, R. Aylett, Modeling culture in intelligent virtual agents, Autonomous
Agents and Multi-Agent Systems 30 (5) (2016) 931–962.
[37] M. Guimaraes, P. Santos, A. Jhala, CiF-CK: An architecture for
social NPCs in commercial games, in: 2017 IEEE Conference on
Computational Intelligence and Games (CIG), 2017, pp. 126–133.
doi:10.1109/CIG.2017.8080425.
[38] B. G. Studios, The elder scrolls v: Skyrim, Bethesda Game Studios, 2015.
[39] J. McCoy, M. Treanor, B. Samuel, B. Tearse, M. Mateas, N. Wardrip-Fruin,
Authoring game-based interactive narrative using social games and comme
il faut, in: Proceedings of the 4th International Conference & Festival of the
Electronic Literature Organization: Archive & Innovate, Citeseer, 2010.
[40] T. D. Kemper, Status, Power and Ritual Interaction, Ashgate, 2011.
[41] M. Cavazza, F. Charles, S. J. Mead, Character-based interactive storytelling, IEEE Intelligent systems 17 (4) (2002) 17–24.
[42] M. Mateas, A. Stern, Façade: An experiment in building a fully-realized
interactive drama, in: Game developers conference, Vol. 2, 2003, pp. 4–8.
[43] K. Entertainment, Don’t starve together (2016).
[44] F. Almeida, P. Rui, Creating an agent-based framework for don’t starve
together, Master’s thesis, IST, University of Lisbon, Portugal (2018).
[45] S. Mascarenhas, M. Guimarães, R. Prada, J. Dias, P. Santos, K. Star,
B. Hirsh, E. Spice, R. Kommeren, A virtual agent toolkit for serious games
developers, in: To Appear in the Proceedings of the Computational Intelligence and Games Conference (CIG) 2018, Maastricht, IEEE, 2018.
[46] M. Guimarães, S. Mascarenhas, R. Prada, P. A. Santos, J. Dias, An accessible toolkit for the creation of socio-emotionalagents, in: Proceedings of
the 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent
Systems, International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems, 2019, pp. 2357–2359.
[47] W. Westera, R. Prada, S. Mascarenhas, P. A. Santos, J. Dias,
M. Guimarães, K. Georgiadis, E. Nyamsuren, K. Bahreini, Z. Yumak, et al.,
Artificial intelligence moving serious gaming: Presenting reusable game ai
components, Education and Information Technologies 25 (1) (2020) 351–
380.
[48] F. Correia, S. Mascarenhas, R. Prada, F. S. Melo, A. Paiva, Group-based
emotions in teams of humans and robots, in: Proceedings of the 2018
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction, ACM,
2018, pp. 261–269.
36

[49] T. Kuppens, V. Y. Yzerbyt, Group-based emotions: The impact of social
identity on appraisals, emotions, and behaviors, Basic and applied social
psychology 34 (1) (2012) 20–33.
[50] J. C. Turner, M. A. Hogg, P. J. Oakes, S. D. Reicher, M. S. Wetherell, Rediscovering the social group: A self-categorization theory., Basil Blackwell,
1987.
[51] A. Goldenberg, E. Halperin, M. van Zomeren, J. J. Gross, The process
model of group-based emotion: Integrating intergroup emotion and emotion
regulation perspectives, Personality and Social Psychology Review 20 (2)
(2016) 118–141.
[52] J. J. Gross, Emotion regulation, Handbook of emotions 3 (2008) 497–513.
[53] F. Correia, P. Alves-Oliveira, T. Ribeiro, F. Melo, A. Paiva, A social robot
as a card game player (2017).
[54] T. Ribeiro, A. Pereira, E. D. Tullio, A. Paiva, The sera ecosystem: Socially
expressive robotics architecture for autonomous human-robot interaction
(2016).

37

