                         The OCC Model Revisited

            Bas R. Steunebrink, Mehdi Dastani, and John-Jules Ch. Meyer

                     Department of Information and Computing Sciences,
                            Utrecht University, The Netherlands
                            {bass,mehdi,jj}@cs.uu.nl


       Abstract. Although popular among computer scientists, the OCC model of emo-
       tions contains a number of ambiguities that stand in the way of a truthful formal-
       ization or implementation. This paper aims to identify and clarify several of these
       ambiguities. Furthermore, a new inheritance-based view of the logical structure
       of emotions of the OCC model is proposed and discussed.


1   Introduction
In their book “The Cognitive Structure of Emotions” [1], Ortony, Clore & Collins have
proposed a very interesting model of emotions that provides a clear and convincing
structure of the eliciting conditions of emotions and the variables that affect their inten-
sities. This psychological model is popular among computer scientists that are building
systems that reason about emotions or incorporate emotions in artificial characters.
     However, although many ad hoc or simplified implementations of “the OCC model”
have been made, there have been fewer attempts at formalizing the complete, logical
structure of the proposed emotion model (e.g., [2–4]). We are attempting to do so, us-
ing a formal logic containing constructs to reason about agents, their beliefs and actions,
objects, and events. We are currently formalizing the eliciting conditions of emotions
in this logic, trying to stay as close as possible to the book. Unfortunately, we have run
into several ambiguities that stand in the way of a truthful formalization. We realize that
satisfying logicians was not the primary concern of the book, but given their aim to pro-
vide a “computationally tractable account” (quoted from the back cover), it is important
that computer scientists have an unambiguous structure of emotions to work with.
     The contribution of this paper is to provide clarifications of the logical structure
underlying the OCC model. After identifying several issues, we propose an inheritance-
based view of the OCC model, supported by a new logical structure (figure 2) and new
emotion type specifications (table 2). The structure that we propose aims to resolve
several ambiguities in the OCC model, while our emotion type specifications have a
stronger correspondence with the logical structure.
     It should be emphasized that the current authors are not psychologists. We certainly
do not claim to have more knowledge of emotions than OCC. We are computer sci-
entists and logicians, and we have studied the OCC model from this perspective. Our
critique only concerns the logical structure underlying the OCC model. Nevertheless, it
is entirely possible that our interpretation of the OCC model is colored by our computer
scientist’s way of thinking. However, we do not find this possibility problematic, be-
cause the aim of our research into emotions is to make emotions computable (and make
useful systems with them, of course).
     Fig. 1. The original structure of emotions of the OCC model, copied from page 19 [1].


2    The OCC Model
The OCC model describes a hierarchy that classifies 22 emotion types (see figure 1).
The hierarchy contains three branches, namely emotions concerning consequences of
events (e.g., joy and pity), actions of agents (e.g., pride and reproach), and aspects of
objects (e.g., love and hate). Additionally, some branches combine to form a group of
compound emotions, namely emotions concerning consequences of events caused by
actions of agents (e.g., gratitude and anger). Because these notions (i.e. events, actions,
and objects) are also commonly used in agent models, this makes the OCC model suit-
able for use in artificial agents.
    Throughout the book, specifications are given for each of the 22 emotion types. For
example, below is the specification of the class of emotions labeled as ‘fear’ in the OCC
model (copied from page 112 [1]):
FEAR EMOTIONS
TYPE SPECIFICATION: (displeased about) the prospect of an undesirable event
TOKENS: apprehensive, anxious, cowering, dread, fear, fright, nervous, petrified, scared, terrified, timid, worried, etc.
VARIABLES AFFECTING INTENSITY:
(1) the degree to which the event is undesirable
(2) the likelihood of the event
EXAMPLE: The employee, suspecting he was no longer needed, feared that he would be fired.
             Joy: (pleased about) a desirable event
        Distress: (displeased about) an undesirable event
      Happy-for: (pleased about) an event presumed to be desirable for someone else
            Pity: (displeased about) an event presumed to be undesirable for someone else
       Gloating: (pleased about) an event presumed to be undesirable for someone else
    Resentment: (displeased about) an event presumed to be desirable for someone else
           Hope: (pleased about) the prospect of a desirable event
            Fear: (displeased about) the prospect of an undesirable event
    Satisfaction: (pleased about) the confirmation of the prospect of a desirable event
Fears-confirmed: (displeased about) the confirmation of the prospect of an undesirable event
          Relief: (pleased about) the disconfirmation of the prospect of an undesirable event
Disappointment: (displeased about) the disconfirmation of the prospect of a desirable event
           Pride: (approving of) one’s own praiseworthy action
         Shame: (disapproving of) one’s own blameworthy action
    Admiration: (approving of) someone else’s praiseworthy action
       Reproach: (disapproving of) someone else’s blameworthy action
   Gratification: (approving of) one’s own praiseworthy action and (being pleased about) the related desirable event
       Remorse: (disapproving of) one’s own blameworthy action and (being displeased about) the related undesirable event
       Gratitude: (approving of) someone else’s praiseworthy action and (being pleased about) the related desirable event
          Anger: (disapproving of) someone else’s blameworthy action and
                  (being displeased about) the related undesirable event
           Love: (liking) an appealing object
            Hate: (disliking) an unappealing object
     Table 1. The emotion type specifications of the OCC model, copied from the book [1].

    Besides an example at the bottom, these specifications have three elements:
    (1) The type specification provides, in a concise sentence, the conditions that elicit
an emotion of the type in question.
    (2) A list of tokens is provided, showing which emotion words can be classified as
belonging to the emotion type in question. For example, ‘fright’, ‘scared’, and ‘terrified’
are all types of fear. (Of course, ‘fear’ is also a type of fear.)
    (3) For each emotion type, a list of variables affecting intensity is provided. These
variables are local to the emotion type in question, i.e., global variables (such as arousal)
that affect all emotions are not included. The idea is that higher values for these vari-
ables result in higher emotional intensities.
    In table 1 we have summarized the type specifications of all 22 emotion types.


3    Ambiguities and Clarifications
The presentation of the structure of the OCC model (see figure 1) is sure to make many
computer scientists (including us) think of an inheritance diagram; that is, each emotion
type is like its parent type plus some specialization. For example, displeased is a nega-
tively valenced reaction to a consequence of an event; distress is displeased plus a focus
on the self; regret is distress plus the constraint that the consequence in question sig-
nals a loss of opportunity, etc. Although it may not have been the authors’ intention to
present the structure of emotions as an inheritance hierarchy, we think it is actually use-
ful to think of it that way and pursue this direction further. However, this interpretation
reveals several ambiguities in the logical structure underlying the OCC model. In this
section, we will list a number of such issues, together with our proposed clarifications.
    (1) In table 1, the phrase “desirable event” is used many times. However, events are
actually always appraised with respect to their consequences. For example, an earth-
quake in itself does not have a valence; only the consequences of this event (e.g., valu-
able lessons for seismologists, property damage, loss of life) are appraised as being
desirable or undesirable. Because desirability only applies to consequences of events,
every instance of the phrase “desirable event” should actually be read as a shorthand for
“desirable consequence of an event.” Furthermore, the term “prospect” (used in, e.g.,
hope and fear) is intentionally ambiguous: it is used to refer to both future events and
uncertain (past or current) events. Many formalizations appear to use OCC’s notion of
prospect in only one of these senses. For example, Adam [4] and Gratch & Marsella [2]
only used uncertain prospects when formalizing hope and fear, whereas Steunebrink,
Dastani & Meyer [3] only used future prospects.
    (2) Looking closely at figure 1, we see that each of the three branches is headed
by a set of emotional words; namely, pleased/displeased for event-based emotions, ap-
proving/disapproving for action-based emotions, and liking/disliking for object-based
emotions. These are supposed to be the most undifferentiated emotion types. For exam-
ple, “being pleased” represents the situation where one has appraised a consequence
of an event as being desirable, but it says nothing about, e.g., whether that conse-
quence is viewed as prospective or actual (i.e., one cannot say whether it is hope or
joy), or whether that consequence is presumed to be desirable or undesirable for some-
one else (i.e., one cannot say whether it is happy-for or gloating). When the struc-
ture as shown in figure 1 is regarded as an inheritance hierarchy, pleased/displeased,
approving/disapproving and liking/disliking then become generalized emotion types,
from which all emotion types below them are derived. Indeed, in OCC’s structure of
variables affecting intensity, each emotion type inherits all variables from its parents.
For example, ‘gratification’ inherits all variables from ‘joy’ and ‘pride’ (this can even
be seen as a kind of multiple inheritance).
    (3) As can be seen in figure 1, ‘joy’ is classified as an emotion type arising from
positively appraising the consequences of an event where the focus is on consequences
for the self and prospects are irrelevant. However, the type specification of ‘joy’ is
given as “(pleased about) a desirable event” (see table 1), with no mention of a focus
on the self or the irrelevance of prospects. So either the type specification of ‘joy’ is
incomplete, or a focus on the self and a disregard of prospects is implicitly assumed to
be the default. (In personal communication, OCC have acknowledged the latter to be
the case.) A downside of assuming defaults, however, is that the type specification of
‘joy’ then conflates with ‘pleased’; just as ‘joy’, ‘pleased’ is a valenced reaction to a
desirable event. The difference is only implicit; namely, ‘pleased’ is undifferentiated,
whereas ‘joy’ has a default differentiation on the self and a disregard of prospects.
    (4) As can be seen in table 1, ‘joy’ is specified as “(pleased about) a desirable event”
and ‘distress’ is specified as “(displeased about) an undesirable event.” Crossing these
specifications, one may wonder whether there is such a thing as “being pleased about
an undesirable event” or “being displeased about a desirable event.” The same holds
for other pairs of opposite emotion types (i.e., pride/shame, love/hate, etc.): almost all
type specifications contain a duplicate positivity or negativity. Often this is not prob-
lematic; for example, if one approves of an action, it must be praiseworthy, and vice
versa. However, in some cases this duplication can introduce ambiguity; for example,
in the type specification of ‘hope’, does “being pleased” enforce the phrase “desirable
event,” or does the pleasure apply to having the “prospect” thereof? In other cases,
pleased/displeased and desirable/undesirable are indeed crossed; for example, compare
the type specifications of ‘relief’ and ‘disappointment’ in table 1. In the next section we
will propose a way to remove these duplications and ambiguities.
     (5) In figure 1, the six prospect-based emotion types are grouped in a framed struc-
ture with an inner hierarchy. How should this nesting be interpreted? On page 19
[1], OCC explicitly state that the figure represents a logical structure of emotions,
not a temporal one. This would mean that both satisfaction/fears-confirmed and re-
lief/disappointment are more differentiated types of hope/fear, or, to continue our
inheritance-based perspective, they are specializations of hope/fear. In particular, dis-
appointment would then have to be a specialization of fear. However, this cannot be,
because disappointment does not inherit anything from fear; it inherits its variables
affecting intensity from hope, but its valence is reversed (hope is positive and disap-
pointment is negative). The relation between hope and disappointment appears to be
more of a temporal kind. For example, first Bob hopes Alice will show up for their date,
but when she does not, his hope turns into disappointment. Thus satisfaction, fears-
confirmed, relief, and disappointment are not special kinds of hope or fear, but more
like continuations of hope or fear, counting from the point when an event has been per-
ceived that signals the confirmation or disconfirmation of the thing hoped for or feared.
In other words, these four types are emotions in response to actual consequences of
events, namely consequences signaling the confirmation or disconfirmation of a previ-
ously prospective consequence. In the next section we will propose to move these four
emotion types from under hope/fear to become specializations of joy/distress.
     (6) Consider the group of fortunes-of-others emotion types (happy-for, resentment,
gloating, pity) and their type specifications in table 1. For there to be a ‘happy-for’
emotion, the consequence that is desirable for the other must also be desirable for one-
self to some degree (probably because it satisfies an interest goal; page 94 [1]). But if
a consequence of an event is appraised as being desirable for oneself, the conditions
for ‘joy’ are satisfied (see table 1). So logically speaking, happy-for/gloating implies
joy, and resentment/pity implies distress. If the specifications of joy and distress are
subsets of those of the fortunes-of-others emotions, then joy and distress are general-
izations of happy-for, resentment, gloating, and pity and should thus be their parents in
the hierarchy.
     (7) The structure of emotions as illustrated in figure 1 contains the phrases “focusing
on” and “prospects (ir)relevant” several times. We believe this terminology weakens the
logical structure, or at least the inheritance view of it. It may indeed be intuitive to say
that ‘joy’ is an emotion type where one is “focusing on” a consequence for the self
and that ‘happy-for’ is an emotion type where one is “focusing on” a consequence
for someone else, but as we have just shown above, ‘happy-for’ logically implies ‘joy’.
Moreover, we have also shown in (5) that the connections from hope/fear to the emotion
types below them are not purely logical but also temporal. So there are relations between
emotion types in the structure that are not captured by presenting it as in figure 1. In
the next section, this will be resolved by abandoning the phrases “focusing on” and
“prospects (ir)relevant” and adopting a stricter inheritance-based view.
     (8) Finally, the branch of attraction-based emotions (i.e., liking/disliking and love/
hate) looks a bit awkward to us, because there are no conditions to distinguish love/hate
from its generalization liking/disliking. In other words, love/hate does not seem to ex-
tend its parent type, at least not judging from figure 1. However, whereas liking/disliking
has appealingness as its only variable affecting intensity, love/hate extends this by
adding the variable familiarity. According to OCC, the more familiar one is with an ap-
pealing object, the more one will love it, and the more familiar one is with an unappeal-
ing object, the more one will hate it. Interestingly, OCC have chosen not to differentiate
based on familiarity. In contrast, below approving/disapproving, the variable strength
of cognitive unit is used to differentiate between pride/shame on the one hand (i.e., the
acting agent is in a cognitive unit with the experiencing agent) and admiration/reproach
on the other hand (i.e., the acting agent is distinct from the experiencing agent). Like-
wise, below pleased/displeased, the variable likelihood is used to differentiate between
hope/fear on the one hand (i.e., an event is possible but not certain) and joy/distress on
the other hand (i.e., an event has actually happened). Analogously, one could use the
variable familiarity to differentiate between love/hate on the one hand (i.e., for familiar
objects) and interest/disgust on the other hand (i.e., for unfamiliar objects).


4   The OCC Model Revisited

The structure of emotions as proposed by OCC and illustrated in figure 1 may be in-
tuitive, but it falls short of capturing the logical structure underlying the OCC model.
Taking the points of the previous section into consideration, we have constructed a new
hierarchy, as shown in figure 2. It may not be as beautiful as the original figure; e.g.,
the naming of groups of emotion types (“attraction,” “attribution,” etc.) has been lost.
Although it does not contain anything really new (we are not psychologists, after all),
the structure has been altered in several ways to bring it more in line with our computer
scientists’ inheritance-based way of thinking. Below we elaborate on the differences.
     (1) Figure 2 represents the inheritance structure explicitly, because it has labels at
every point in the hierarchy, and the conditions of every child node are a superset of
those of its parent node(s).
     (2) Along each connection are written (in small caps) the additional condition(s)
that make an emotion type a specialization of its parent type(s). Ambiguous terms
are avoided; for example, we have omitted or replaced the phrases “focusing on” and
“prospects (ir)relevant.” In distinguishing pride/shame from admiration/reproach, the
action in question must have been performed by either the self or another agent, so the
phrase “focusing on” is redundant. In distinguishing hope/fear from joy/distress, we
consider the consequence in question to be perceived as either prospective or actual.
In contrast, the phrase “prospects irrelevant,” as used in figure 1, suggests that there is
no differentiation on prospects for joy/distress, which would mean that joy/distress is a
generalization of hope/fear, which would contradict figure 1 because joy/distress is de-
picted next to hope/fear instead of above it. To avoid such ambiguities we have strived
to use clearer terms.
     (3) Satisfaction, fears-confirmed, relief, and disappointment have been moved from
under hope/fear to become specializations of joy/distress. This is because we regard a
confirmation or disconfirmation to be an actual consequence (of an event). According
to OCC, these four emotion types require an “attendant” hope or fear emotion; however,
we interpret this as meaning that one emotion requires the presence of another emotion
     Fig. 2. A disambiguated, inheritance-based hierarchy of emotions of the OCC model.

to be elicited (e.g., relief requires that something is or was feared), not that one emo-
tion is a specialization of another emotion (e.g., relief is not a special type of fear). The
conditions that we have put on the connections in figure 2 capture this interpretation as
follows: the phrase “prospective desirable consequence” matches the type specification
for hope, and “prospective undesirable consequence” matches with fear. Thus the con-
ditions of satisfaction, fears-confirmed, relief, and disappointment require the existence
of an attendant hope or fear emotion, in line with OCC’s specifications.
    (4) Happy-for, resentment, gloating, and pity have been moved from the left of
figure 1 to the bottom right of figure 2. This is due to the reasoning of point (6) in the
previous section.
    (5) In line with point (8) in the previous section, we have added interest/digust as
an additional (i.e., besides love/hate) specialization of liking/disliking, based on the
familiarity with the object in question.
    (6) One thing that we find particularly attractive about figure 2 is that type specifica-
tions now follow immediately from the diagram. Descriptions can easily be formed by
                positive and negative are valenced reactions (to “something”)
                 pleased is being positive about a consequence (of an event)
             displeased is being negative about a consequence (of an event)
                    hope is being pleased about a prospective consequence (of an event)
                     fear is being displeased about a prospective consequence (of an event)
                       joy is being pleased about an actual consequence (of an event)
                 distress is being displeased about an actual consequence (of an event)
            satisfaction is joy about the confirmation of a prospective desirable consequence
       fears-confirmed is distress about the confirmation of a prospective undesirable consequence
                   relief is joy about the disconfirmation of a prospective undesirable consequence
        disappointment is distress about the disconfirmation of a prospective desirable consequence
              happy-for is joy about a consequence (of an event) presumed to be desirable for someone else
             resentment is distress about a consequence (of an event) presumed to be desirable for someone else
                gloating is joy about a consequence (of an event) presumed to be undesirable for someone else
                      pity is distress about a consequence (of an event) presumed to be undesirable for someone else
              approving is being positive about an action (of an agent)
          disapproving is being negative about an action (of an agent)
                    pride is approving of one’s own action
                  shame is disapproving of one’s own action
            admiration is approving of someone else’s action
               reproach is disapproving of someone else’s action
           gratification is pride about an action and joy about a related consequence
                remorse is shame about an action and distress about a related consequence
               gratitude is admiration about an action and joy about a related consequence
                   anger is reproach about an action and distress about a related consequence
                   liking is being positive about an aspect (of an object)
               disliking is being negative about an aspect (of an object)
                     love is liking a familiar aspect (of an object)
                     hate is disliking a familiar aspect (of an object)
                 interest is liking an unfamiliar aspect (of an object)
                 disgust is disliking an unfamiliar aspect (of an object)
            Table 2. These emotion type specifications correspond directly to figure 2.

following any link from child to parent node, inserting the text on the link. The resulting
type specifications are displayed in table 2 (cf. table 1).

5    Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper we have identified a number of ambiguities in the logical structure under-
lying the popular OCC model of emotions [1]. If these ambiguities are not resolved,
computer scientists wishing to formalize or implement emotions may come up with
conflicting interpretations of the psychological model. Therefore we have proposed a
new inheritance-based view of the structure of emotions, which addresses the ambigui-
ties that we have identified. This effort is part of our goal to formalize emotions in logic
in a way which is both truthful to the OCC model and useful for Artificial Intelligence.

References
1. Ortony, A., Clore, G.L., Collins, A.: The Cognitive Structure of Emotions. Cambridge Uni-
   versity Press, Cambridge, UK (1988)
2. Gratch, J., Marsella, S.: A domain-independent framework for modeling emotions. Journal
   of Cognitive Systems Research 5(4) (2004) 269–306
3. Steunebrink, B.R., Dastani, M., Meyer, J.-J.Ch.: A logic of emotions for intelligent agents. In:
   Proceedings of the 22nd Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI’07), AAAI Press (2007)
4. Adam, C.: The Emotions: From Psychological Theories to Logical Formalization and Imple-
   mentation in a BDI Agent. PhD thesis, Institut National Polytechnique de Toulouse (2007)
